1

A survey of face recognition techniques
under occlusion

arXiv:2006.11366v1 [cs.CV] 19 Jun 2020

Dan Zeng, Raymond Veldhuis and Luuk Spreeuwers
University of Twente, The Netherlands
{d.zeng,r.n.j.veldhuis,l.j.spreeuwers}@utwente.nl

Abstract—The limited capacity to recognize faces under occlusions is a long-standing problem that presents a unique challenge
for face recognition systems and even for humans. The problem
regarding occlusion is less covered by research when compared to
other challenges such as pose variation, different expressions, etc.
Nevertheless, occluded face recognition is imperative to exploit
the full potential of face recognition for real-world applications.
In this paper, we restrict the scope to occluded face recognition.
First, we explore what the occlusion problem is and what
inherent difficulties can arise. As a part of this review, we
introduce face detection under occlusion, a preliminary step in
face recognition. Second, we present how existing face recognition
methods cope with the occlusion problem and classify them into
three categories, which are 1) occlusion robust feature extraction
approaches, 2) occlusion aware face recognition approaches,
and 3) occlusion recovery based face recognition approaches.
Furthermore, we analyze the motivations, innovations, pros and
cons, and the performance of representative approaches for
comparison. Finally, future challenges and method trends of
occluded face recognition are thoroughly discussed.
Index Terms—face recognition under occlusion, occluded face
detection, occlusion detection, occlusion recovery, partial face
recognition, survey

Fig. 1.

Examples of occluded face images from the MAFA dataset.
TABLE I
A CATEGORIZATION OF O CCLUSION C HALLENGES

Occlusion Scenario
Facial accessories
External occlusions
Limited field of view
Self-occlusions
Extreme illumination
Artificial Occlusions

Examples
eyeglasses, sunglasses, scarves, mask, hat, hair
occluded by hands and random objects
partial faces
non-frontal pose
part of face highlighted
random black rectangles
random white rectangles
random salt & pepper noise

I. I NTRODUCTION

F

ACE recognition is a computer vision task that has been
extensively studied for several decades [9]. Compared
with other popular biometrics such as fingerprint, iris, palm,
and vein, the face has a significantly better potential to
recognize the identity in a non-intrusive manner. Therefore,
face recognition is widely used in many application domains
such as surveillance, forensics, and border control. With the
development of deep learning techniques [47], [68], [86], [87],
[127], [131], [132], [145], [149] and the publicly available
large-scale face datasets [7], [10], [44], [99], [113], [168],
face recognition performance has improved substantially [71],
[137]. However, face recognition systems still tend to perform
far from satisfactory when encountering challenges such as
large-pose variation, varying illumination, low resolution, different facial expressions, and occlusion. Generally, face images
stored in a gallery are of high quality and free from the above
degradations, while probe faces are suffering from what can
be seen as a missing data problem due to these challenges.
Consequently, fewer facial parts are available for recognition,
which induces a mismatch between feature available in probe
faces and gallery faces.
Facial occlusion [28], [104] is considered one of the most
intractable problems because we do not have prior knowledge

about the occluded part, which can be anywhere and of any
size or shape in a face image. From a practical point of view, it
is not feasible to collect a large-scale training dataset with all
possible occlusions in a realistic scenario to use deep learning
techniques. Therefore, the problem of face recognition under
occlusions remains a challenge. Facial occlusion occurs when
the subject wears accessories such as a scarf, a face mask,
glasses, a hat, etc., or when random objects are present in front
of the face. The recognition accuracy has been compromised in
some way because of the higher inter-class similarity and the
more considerable intra-class variations caused by occlusion.
Facial appearance changes substantially due to occlusion, as
illustrated in Fig. 1. We present a categorization of occlusion
challenges in different scenarios with their typical occlusion
examples (see Table I). Pose variation can partially be seen as a
self-occlusion problem caused by a large rotation of the head.
The self-occlusion problem due to pose variation is usually
dealt with in pose correction and therefore not discussed here.
In most cases, occluded face recognition (OFR) involves
querying a gallery consisting of occlusion-free faces using a
probe image from an alternative test dataset of occluded faces.
Occluded faces rely on either the collection of real occlusions

2

or synthetic occlusions. We first break down OFR research
scenarios in the most obvious way by the pairs of images
considered. Fig. 2 offers an illustration of the five categories
regarding OFR testing scenarios. More specifically, five widely
used testing scenarios for OFR, ranging from most real to least
real, are:
• Real occlusions: gallery images are mugshots free from
occlusion while probe images are faces occluded by
realistic images such as sunglasses, or a scarf.
• Partial faces: gallery images are mugshots free from
occlusion while test face images are partial faces; hence
the name partial face recognition is given by researchers.
• Synthetic occlusions: gallery images are faces in the wild
which are captured from uncontrolled scenarios while
probe faces are blocked with synthetic occlusions to
simulate real occlusions.
• Occluding rectangle: gallery images are occlusion-free
mugshots while test face images are occluded with a
rectangle such as white and black rectangles.
• Occluding unrelated images: gallery images are
mugshots free from occlusion while test face images are
occluded with unrelated images such as a baboon, or a
non-square image.
Occluded
Faces
Occluding unrelated images

Real occlusions

Occlusion-free
Faces
Fig. 2.
OFR.

Different occluded face recognition testing scenarios involved in

Approaches to recognizing faces under occlusions can be
broadly classified into three categories (shown in Fig. 3),
which are 1) occlusion robust feature extraction (ORFE), 2)
occlusion aware face recognition (OAFR) and 3) occlusion
recovery based face recognition (ORecFR). An OFR system consists of three components, each corresponding to an
important design decision: cross-occlusion strategy, feature
extraction, and comparison strategy. Of these components, the
second and third have analogues in general face recognition,
while cross-occlusion strategy is unique to OFR.
• ORFE category searches for a feature space that is
less affected by facial occlusions. Generally, patch-based
engineered and learning-based features are used as the
cross-occlusion strategy.
• OAFR category is explicitly aware where the occlusion

is. Generally, occlusion-discard is applied as the crossocclusion strategy. As a result, only visible face parts
qualify for face recognition (i.e., feature extraction, feature comparison). Furthermore, we classify partial face
recognition approaches as OAFR because they exclude
occlusion parts from face recognition, assuming that
visible parts are ready in the beginning.
• ORecFR category intends to recover an occlusion-free
face from the occluded face to meet the demands of
conventional face recognition systems. In other words, it
takes occlusion recovery as the cross-occlusion strategy.

Section 3 ORFE

Occlusion Robust Feature Extraction
Section 4 OAFR

Section 2

Occlusion Detect

Occlusion Discard Face Recognition

Partial Face Detect

Partial Face Recognition

Occluded
Face Detection

Occluded Probe
Section 5 ORecFR

Occlusion Recovery

Face Recognition

Fig. 3. The three categories of methods for face recognition under occlusion
challenges.

Numerous methods have been proposed to push the frontier of face recognition research. Several comprehensive surveys [5], [22], [70] have been published for face recognition
under occlusion. Of the existing works, the survey by Lahasan
et al. [70] on face recognition under occlusion challenges
presents a thorough overview of the approaches before 2017,
which is the most relevant to this paper. However, there
are at least two reasons why a new survey on occluded
face recognition is needed. First, the explosive growth of
face recognition techniques these years has stimulated many
innovative contributions to handle occluded face recognition
problems. The increased number of publications over the
last few years calls for a new survey for occluded face
recognition, including up-to-date approaches, especially deep
learning techniques. Second, several large-scale occluded face
datasets have become publicly available in recent years.
Without large-scale training data of occluded face images,
deep learning models cannot function well [97]. Recently,
the MAFA dataset [36] is accessible for occluded face detection, and the IJB-C dataset [95] is introduced as a general
evaluation benchmark to include meta-information regarding
the occlusion (i.e., occlusion location, occlusion degree).
Predictably, these datasets would encourage occluded face
recognition to develop faster. The proposed survey provides
a systematic categorization of methods for face recognition.
Specifically, occluded face detection techniques are briefly
reviewed because an OFR system requires the application of
occluded face detection as the first step. Moreover, newly published and innovative papers addressing occlusion problems
are thoroughly reviewed. Finally, we represent comparative
performance evaluations in terms of occluded face detection

3

and face recognition on widely used datasets as well as newlydeveloped large-scale datasets.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: occluded face detection techniques are introduced in Section 2.
Methods of occlusion robust feature extraction are described
and analyzed in Section 3. We review occlusion-aware face
recognition approaches in Section 4. Then Section 5 briefly
studies occlusion-recovery face recognition methods. A performance evaluation of the reviewed approaches is given in
Section 6. In section 7, we discuss future challenges to datasets
as well as to research. Finally, we draw an overall conclusion
for occluded face recognition.
II. O CCLUDED FACE DETECTION
In this section, we break down occluded face detection into
two parts containing general face detection methods which
can be applied to detect occluded face, and occluded face
detection methods which are designed specifically to tackle the
occlusion issue in face detection. As for general face detection,
we briefly study relevant methods for the simplicity. We then
elaborate occluded face detection methods that are specifically
designed to detect occluded faces. One way to classify the
methods can be seen in Fig. 4.
Occluded face detection

A. General face detection

B. Detecting occluded face

1) Rigid templates

1) Locate visible facial segments

Viola-Jones face detector
and variants

FacenessNet and varaints

2) Deformable part models

2) Fusion decision on sub-regions

DPM based

LLE-CNNs, FAN

2) Deep learning

3) Adversarially use the occlusion info.

R-CNN and variants, SSD, YOLO
FANet

Gridloss, AOFD, Hierarchical attention

Fig. 4.

Methods used in occluded face detection.

complexity [158]. A third, most promising category of research
is DCNNs based face detection [6], [13], [63], [75], [79],
[129], [166], [172], [176], [179], [182]. Some methods [13],
[172], [176] joint face detection with face alignment to exploit
their inherent correlation to boost the performance. There are
two major branches of object detection framework: (i) region
proposals based CNN (i.e.,two-stage detectors), such as RCNN [39], fast R-CNN [38], faster R-CNN [119]; (ii) region
proposals free CNN (i.e.,one-stage detectors), such as the
Single-Shot Multibox Detector (SSD) [85], YOLO [117]. In
short, two-stage detectors achieve higher performance but are
time-consuming. One-stage detectors have significant computational advantages but compensate by less accurate detection
results. Some methods [63], [129], [175], [179] treat a face as
a natural object and adopt techniques from object detection in
face detection. Most recently, finding tiny faces has become
popular in face detection and superior performance has been
achieved [6], [56], [79], [182].
Recent years have witnessed promising results of exploring
DCNNs for face detection with the introduction of Widerface [166], which offers a wide pose variation, significant scale
difference (tiny face), expression variation, make-up, severe
illumination, and occlusion. Up to now, Feature Agglomeration Networks (FANet) [175], a single-stage face detector,
achieves the state-of-art performance on several face detection
benchmarks include the FDDB [61], the PASCAL Face [159],
and the Widerface benchmark [166]. To exploit inherent multiscale features of a single convolutional neural network, FANet
introduced an Agglomeration Connection module to enhance
the context-aware features and augment low-level feature maps
with a hierarchical structure so that it can cope with scale
variance in face detection effectively. Besides, Hierarchical
Loss is proposed to train FANet to become stable and better in
an end-to-end way. In short, methods that achieve remarkable detection performance, for example on the Widerface
dataset, also provide a solid solution for occluded face
detection.

A. General face detection

B. Detecting occluded face

Face detection generally intends to detect the face that is
captured in an unconstrained environment. It is challenging
due to large-pose variation, varying illumination, low resolution, and occlusion etc. [170]. Approaches to general face
detection can roughly be classified into three categories, which
are
• Rigid templates based face detection.
• Deformable part models (DPM) based face detection.
• Deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) based face
detection.
The Viola-Jones face detector and its variations [141],
[142] are typical in the rigid templates based category, which
utilizes Haar-like features and AdaBoost to train cascaded
classifiers and can achieve good performance with real-time efficiency. However, the performance of these methods can drop
dramatically when handling real-world application [160]. In
contrast, DPM based face detection can achieve significantly
better performance based on the cost of high computational

Detecting partially occluded faces aims to locate the face
region in a given image where occlusion is present. Handling occlusion in face detection is challenging due to the
unknown location and the type of occlusions [14]. Recently,
occluded face detection is beginning to attract the attention
of researchers; therefore a few publications are reviewed.
At the same time, detecting occluded pedestrians is a longstanding research topic that has been intensively studied during
the past few decades. Therefore, many researchers borrow
techniques from pedestrian detection [45], [178], [189] to push
the frontier of occluded face detection by treating occlusion as
the dominating challenge during the detection. Most occluded
face detection methods report their performance on the
MAFA dataset [36] while general face detection methods do
not, which means it is not a level playing field for general
face detection and occluded face detection. Approaches
to detect partially occluded faces are roughly clustered as
1) locating visible facial segments to estimate a full face;

4

2) fusing the detection results obtained from face sub-regions
to mitigate the negative impact of occlusion; 3) using the
occlusion information to help face detection in an adversarial
way.
1) Locating visible facial segments to estimate face: If
visible parts of a face are known, then difficulties in face
detection due to occlusions are largely relieved. Observing
that facial attributes are closely related to facial parts, the
attribute-aware CNNs method [165] intends to exploit the
inherent correlation between a facial attribute and visible facial
parts. Specifically, it discovers facial part responses and scores
these facial parts for face detection by the spatial structure and
arrangement. A set of attribute-aware CNNs are trained with
specific part-level facial attributes (e.g., mouth attributes such
as big lips, open mouth, smiling, wearing lipstick) to generate
facial response maps. Next, a scoring mechanism is proposed
to compute the degree of face likeliness by analyzing their
spatial arrangement. Finally, face classification and bounding
box regression are jointly trained with the face proposals,
resulting in precise face locations. The results on FDDB [61],
PASCAL Face [159] and AFW [192] demonstrate that the
proposed method is capable of yielding good performance.
In particular, they can achieve a high recall rate of 90.99%
on FDDB. In short, Ref. [165] is the first systematic study
to attempt face detection with severe occlusion without using
realistic occluded faces for training.
More recently, the extension faceness-net [167] improves
the robustness of feature representations by involving a more
effective design of CNN. As a result, it has achieved compelling results on the Widerface dataset [166], which is challenging in terms of severe occlusion and unconstrained pose
variations. However, it requires the use of labeled attributes
of facial data to train attribute-aware CNN, which impairs its
practical use in some way.
2) Fusing detection results obtained from face sub-regions:
In paper [91], a facial segment based face detection technique is proposed for mobile phone authentication with faces
captured from the front-facing camera. The detectors are
AdaBoost cascade classifiers trained with a local binary pattern
(LBP) representation of face images. They train fourteen
segments-based face detectors to help cluster segments in order
to estimate a full face or partially visible face. As a result, this
method could achieve excellent performance on the Active
Authentication Dataset (AA-01) [120], [174]. However, the
use of simple architecture increases speed by compromising
detection accuracy.
The introduction of MAFA [36] offers plenty of faces
wearing various masks, which contributes significantly to the
occluded face detection, especially of masked faces. Based on
this dataset, an LLE-CNNs [36] is proposed to benchmark the
performance of masked face detection on the MAFA dataset.
They extract candidate face regions with high-dimensional
descriptors by pre-trained CNNs and employ locally linear
embedding (LLE) to turn them into similarity-based descriptors. Finally, they jointly train the classification and regression
tasks with CNNs to identify candidate facial regions and refine
their position.
To avoid high false positives due to masks and sunglasses,

a face attention network (FAN) detector [146] is proposed to
highlight the features from the face region. More specifically,
the FAN detector integrates an anchor-level attention mechanism into a single-stage object detector like Feature Pyramid
Networks [82]. The attention supervision information is obtained by filling the ground-truth box and is associated with
the ground-truth faces which match the anchors at the current
layer. The attention maps are first fed into an exponential
operation and then combined with feature maps. As a result,
the method is capable of achieving impressive results on the
Widerface [166] with an 88.5% average precision on the hard
subset as well as on an 88.3% average precision on MAFA [36]
dataset.
3) Occlusion information adversarially used for detection:
Apart from selecting the visible facial parts and fusing results
obtained from face sub-regions, it is a third way to minimize
the adverse effects of face detection due to occlusions. One
promising approach is to use a novel grid loss [106], which
has been incorporated into the convolutional neural network
to handle partial occlusion in face detection. It is based on the
observation that partial occlusions would confuse a subset of
detectors, whereas the remaining ones can still make correct
predictions. To this end, this work regards occluded face
detection as a particular single-class object detection problem,
inspired by other works on object detection [30], [52], [75],
[126]. Furthermore, the proposed grid loss minimizes the error
rate on face sub-blocks independently rather than over the
whole face to mitigate the adverse effect of partial occlusions
and to observe improved face detection accuracy.
Using the occluded area as an auxiliary rather than a hindrance is a feasible solution to help face detection adversely.
Adversarial occlusion-aware face detection (AOFD) [18] is
proposed to detect occluded faces and segment the occlusion
area simultaneously. They integrate a masking strategy into
AOFD to mimic different occlusion situations. More specifically, a mask generator is designed to mask the distinctive
part of a face in a training set, forcing the detector to learn
what is possibly a face in an adversarial way. Besides, an
occlusion segmentation branch is introduced to help detect
incomplete faces. The proposed multitask training method
showed superior performance on general as well as masked
face detection benchmarks. To cope with different poses,
scales, illumination, and occlusions, Wu et al. [155] introduce
a hierarchical attention mechanism, applying long short-term
memory (LSTM) to predict face-specific attention. In this
way, it can further model relations between the local parts
and adjust their contribution to face detection. The proposed
method achieves promising performance compared with Faster
R-CNN [119].
III. O CCLUSION ROBUST FEATURE EXTRACTION
If the extracted features are reasonably robust to the occlusion, then difficulties in face recognition due to occlusion are
relieved. The aim is to extract features that are less affected
by occlusions (outliers) while preserving the discriminative
capability. We group the approaches into engineered features
and learning-based features. The former generally extract

5

handcraft features from explicitly defined facial regions, which
do not require optimization or a learning stage. The latter
extract features by using learning-based methods such as
linear subspace methods, sparse representation classification,
or nonlinear deep learning techniques. One way to classify the
methods can be seen in Fig. 5.
Occlusion robust feature extraction

A. Patch based engineered features

B. Learning based features

1) Hand-craft features

1) Subspace learning

LBP, SIFT, HOG, Gabor,
KLD-LGBP

2) Statistical learning

2) Patch-based matching

3) Sparse representation classifier

EBGM, Spatial neighborhood,
Random patch

4) Deep learning

Fig. 5.

Methods used in occlusion robust feature extraction approaches.

A. Patch-based engineered features
Facial descriptors obtained in an engineered way are rather
efficient because they can: (i) be easily extracted from the raw
face images; (ii) discriminate different individuals while tolerating large variability in facial appearances to some extent;
(iii) lie in a low feature space so as to avoid a computationally expensive classifier. Generally, engineered features (i.e.,
handcraft features) are extracted from facial patches and then
concatenated to represent a face. Therefore, a fusion strategy
can be imported to reduce the adverse effects of occluded
patches in some way. Alternatively, patch-based matching
can be used for feature selection to preserve occlusion-free
discriminative information.
These methods in general require precise registration such
as alignment based on eye coordinates for frontal faces and
integrate the decisions from local patches to obtain a final decision for face recognition. This is problematic because these
methods rely on robust face alignment under occlusion, but
the eyes are likely to be occluded. In short, these approaches
are not realistic for application since most often the face
images need to be aligned well to facilitate feature extraction
of meaningful facial structure.
1) Handcraft features: Local Binary Patterns (LBP) [1],
[2] is used to derive a novel and efficient facial image representation and has been widely used in various applications.
LBP and variants [81], [184] retain popularity and succeed
so far in producing good results in biometrics, especially
face recognition. The main idea is to divide the face image
into multiple regions, from which to extract LBP feature
distributions independently. These descriptors are then concatenated to form an enhanced global descriptor of the face.
For distance measurement between two faces, weighted Chi
square distance is applied, accounting for some facial features
being more important in human face recognition than others.
The Scale Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT) descriptor [88]
is popular in object recognition and baseline matching and

can also be applied to face recognition [173]. SIFT is largely
invariant to changes in scale, translation, rotation, and is also
less affected by illumination changes, affine or 3D projection.
Similarly to SIFT, the Histograms of Oriented Gradient (HOG)
descriptor [23] has been proposed to handle human detection
and has been extended to cope with object detection as well as
visual recognition. The main idea is to characterize local object
appearance and shape with the distribution of local integrity
gradients. After applying a dense (in fact, overlapping) grid
of HOG descriptors to the detection window, the descriptors
are combined to suit the further classifier. Contrary to the
integrity oriented methods, Gabor filters and other frequency
oriented approaches construct the face feature from filter
responses. Generally, the filter responses computed for various
frequencies and orientations from a single or multiple spatial
locations are combined to form the Gabor feature [193]. Phase
information instead of magnitude information from Gabor
features contains discrimination and is thus widely used for
recognition [171]. Features based on Gabor filters are versatile.
By post-processing they can be converted, for example, to
binary descriptors of texture similar to LBPs. Ref. [180]
proposes KLD-LGBP, in which Kullback-Leibler Divergence
(KLD) is introduced to measure the distance between the local
Gabor binary patterns (LGBP) feature [181] of the local region
of test images and that of the unoccluded local region of
reference faces. They define the probability of occlusions of
that area as the distance between two distributions of local
regions and further use it as the weight of the local region
for the final feature matching. The main drawback of this
method is the high dimensionality of LGBP features, which are
the combination of Gabor transform, LBP, and a local region
histogram on local face regions.
2) Patch-based matching: Beside representation, the distance metric also plays an important role. Elastic and partial
matching schemes bring in a lot of flexibility when handling
challenges in face recognition. Elastic Bunch Graph Matching (EBGM) [152] uses a graph to represent a face, each
node of the graph corresponding to Gabor jets extracted from
facial landmarks. The matching method is used to calculate the
distance between corresponding representations of two faces.
To take advantage of elastic and partial matching, Ref. [57]
proposes a robust matching metric to match Difference of
Gaussian (DoG) filter descriptor of a facial part against its
spatial neighborhood in the other faces and select the minimal
distance for face recognition. Specifically, they extract N
local descriptors from densely overlapped image patches.
During the matching, each descriptor in one face is picked
up to match its spatial neighborhood descriptors and then the
minimal distance is selected, which is effective in reducing the
adverse effects of occlusion. A random sampling patch-based
method [12] has been proposed to use all face patches equally
to reduce the effects of occlusion. It trains multiple support
vector machine (SVM) classifiers with selected patches at
random. Finally, the results from each classifier are combined
to enhance the recognition accuracy. Similarly to elastic bunch
graph matching [152], dynamic graph representation [118] is
proposed to build feature graphs based on node representations. Each node corresponds to certain regions of the face

6

image and the edge between nodes represents the spatial relationship between two regions. Dynamic graph representation
can enable elastic and partial matching, where each node in
one face image is matched with adjacent nodes in the other
face image for face recognition, which brings in robustness
to occlusion especially when encountering partially occluded
biometrics.
B. Learning-based features
Compared with engineered features, learned features are
more flexible when various occlusion types at different locations are present. Features learned from training data can
be effective and have potentially high discriminative power
for face recognition. Unlike regular images, face images share
common constraints, such as containing a smooth surface and
regular texture. Face images are in fact confined to a face
subspace. Therefore, subspace learning methods have been
successfully applied to learn a subspace that can preserve
variations of face manifolds necessary to discriminate among
individuals. Taking the occlusion challenge as a major concern,
it is natural to apply statistical methods on face patches
allowing for the fact that not all types of occlusion have the
same probability of occurring. Sparse representation classifier
methods, which fully explore the discriminative power of
sparse representation and represent a face with a combination
coefficient of training samples, have been the mainstream
approach to handle various challenges in face recognition
for a long time. The last few years have witnessed a great
success of deep learning techniques [94], especially deep
convolutional neural networks (DCNN) for uncontrolled face
recognition applications.
1) Subspace learning: Approaches such as the Principal
component analysis (PCA) [138] and the Linear Discriminant
Analysis (LDA) [8] are the two most representative methods in
learning the subspace for feature extraction. Eigenface [138]
uses PCA to learn the most representative subspace from
training face images. Fisherface [8] uses LDA to explore
a discriminant subspace that differentiates faces of different
individuals by incorporating the class labels of faces images.
One limitation for these appearance-based methods is that
proper alignment specifically based on the eye location is
required. Modular PCA [42] builds multiple eigen spaces
(eigenfeatures) in the regions of facial components (e.g., eyes,
nose, and mouth) to achieve variance tolerance, especially
for face variances. Ref. [24] uses an influence function technique to develop robust subspace learning for a variety of
linear models within a continuous optimization framework.
Ref. [73] uses the property of PCA to detect “outliers” and
occlusions, and calculates the coefficients using the rest of
the pixels. Inspired by robust PCA [73], a new approach
combining discriminative power and reconstructive property
has been proposed by Fidler et al. [31], which can achieve
good classification results and have the construction abilities
to detect outliers (occlusions). Specifically, object recognition
and face recognition applications are used to estimate the
robustness of LDA coefficients. Besides, objects orientation
application, a regression task, is introduced to estimate the

robustness of extended CCA coefficients. Ref. [65] proposes
independent component analysis (ICA) to use locally salient
information from important facial parts for face recognition.
This part-based representation method could achieve better
performance in case of partial occlusions and local distortions
than PCA and LDA. Unlike linear subspace methods, nonlinear subspace methods use nonlinear transforms to convert
a face image into a discriminative feature vector, which
may attain highly accurate recognition in practical scenarios.
Ref. [122] proposes kernel correlation feature analysis (KCFA)
on facial regions, i.e., eye-region, nose-region, and mouthregion to cope with partial face recognition. The proposed
KCFA for feature extraction outperforms the linear approaches
PCA [138], LDA [8] and variants of kernel methods [164],
[188].
2) Statistical learning: In real-world applications, not all
types of occlusions have the same probability of occurring; for
example, a scarf and sunglasses often have a higher probability
of occurrence compared with others. Hence, it is natural
to apply statistical learning on face patches to account for
their occlusion possibility. One early work in this direction
is Ref. [93], which takes a probabilistic approach, i.e., a
mixture of Gaussians to compensate for partially occluded
faces. Specifically, they analyze local regions divided from
a face in isolation and apply the probabilistic approach to find
the best match so that the recognition system is less sensitive
to occlusion. Ref. [134] extends the work by representing the
face subspace with self-organizing maps (SOM). It presents
the similarity relationship of the subblocks in the input space
in the SOM topological space. Furthermore, they use the soft k
nearest neighbor ensemble classifier to efficiently capture the
similarity relationship obtained by SOM projections, which in
turn improves the whole system’s robustness. However, this
method assumes knowledge of the occluded parts in advance.
Since partial occlusion affects only specific local features,
Ref. [53] proposes a local Gaussian kernel for feature extraction and trains the SVM using the summation of local kernels
as combine features. However, it is suboptimal to use the same
size local kernel rather than select the appropriate size of the
local kernel for local feature extraction. In Ref. [133], a nonmetric partial similarity measure based on local features is
introduced to capture the prominent partial similarity among
face images while excluding the unreliable and unimportant
features.
In paper [124], a face recognition method is proposed
that takes partial occlusions into account by using statistical
learning of local features. To this end, they estimated the
probability density of the SIFT feature descriptors observed
in training images based on a simple Gaussian model. In the
classification stage, the estimated probability density is used
to measure the importance of each local feature of test images
by defining a weighted distance measure between two images.
Based on this work, they extended the statistical learning
based on local features to a general framework [125], which
combines the learned weight of local features and featurebased similarity to define the distance measurement. However,
feature extraction from the local region cannot code the spatial
information of faces. Besides, the unreliable features from the

7

occluded area are also integrated into the final representation,
which will reduce the performance. McLaughlin et al. [96]
try to solve random partial occlusion in test images using the
largest matching areas at each point on the face. They assume
that the occluded test image region can be modeled by an
unseen-data likelihood with a low posterior probability. More
specifically, they de-emphasize the local facial area with low
posterior probabilities from the overall score for each face
and select only reliable areas for recognition, which results in
improved robustness to partial occlusion.
3) Sparse representation classifier: Apart from these statistical learning methods, several algorithms use sparse representation classifiers (SRC) to tackle the occlusion in face
recognition. Ever since its introduction [153], SRC attracts
increasing attention from researchers. This method explores
the discriminative power of sparse representation of a test
face. It uses a linear combination of training samples plus
sparse errors to account for occlusion or corruption as its
representation. Yang et al. [163] propose a Gabor feature based
Robust Representation and Classification (GRRC) scheme.
They use Gabor features instead of pixel values to represent
face images, which can increase the ability to discriminate
identity. Moreover, the use of a compact Gabor occlusion
dictionary requires less expensive computation to code the
occlusion portions compared with that of the original SRC.
To investigate the effectiveness of the proposed method, they
conduct extensive experiments to recognize faces with block
occlusions as well as real occlusions. A subset of the AR
database was used in this experiment. It consists of 799 images
(about eight samples per subject) of non-occluded frontal
views with various facial expressions for training. The sunglasses test set contains 100 images with the subject wearing
sunglasses (with a neural expression), and the scarves test set
contains 100 images with the subject wearing a scarf (with
a neural expression). The proposed GRRC achieves 93.0%
recognition accuracy on sunglasses and 79% accuracy on
scarves, which outperforms the original SRC by 5% and 20%,
respectively. In paper [84], artificial occlusions are included to
construct training data for training sparse and dense hybrid
representation framework. The results show that artificially
introduced occlusions are important to obtain discriminative
features. Structured occlusion coding (SOC) [148] is proposed
to employ an occlusion-appended dictionary to simultaneously
separate the occlusion and classify the face. In this case, with
the use of corresponding parts of the dictionary, face and
occlusion can be represented respectively, making it possible
to handle large occlusion, like a scarf. In paper [32], efficient
locality-constrained occlusion coding (ELOC) is proposed to
greatly reduce the running time without sacrificing too much
accuracy, inspired by the observation that it is possible to
estimate the occlusion using identity-unrelated samples.
Recently, another work [162] attempts face recognition with
single sample per person and intends to achieve robustness and
effectiveness for complex facial variations such as occlusions.
It proposes a joint and collaborative representation with local
adaptive convolution feature (ACF), containing local highlevel features from local regular regions. The joint and collaborative representation framework requires ACFs extracted

from different local areas to have similar coefficients regarding
a representation dictionary. Ref. [33] proposes to learn a
robust and discriminative low-rank representation (RDLRR)
for optimal classification, which aiming to prepare the learned
representations optimally for classification as well as to capture the global structure of data and the holistic structure of
each occlusion induced error image. The results demonstrate
that the method can yield better performance in case of
illumination changes, real occlusion as well as block occlusion. Ref. [74] combines center-symmetric local binary
patterns (CSLBP) with enhanced center-symmetric local binary patterns (ECSLBP) to build the SRC dictionary for
occluded face recognition. In Ref. [169], discriminative multiscale sparse coding (DMSC) is proposed to address singlesample face recognition with different kinds of occlusion.
More specifically, it learns the auxiliary dictionary to model
the possible occlusion variations from external data based on
PCA and proposes a multi-scale error measurement strategy to
detect and disregard outlier pixels due to occlusion. Ref [154]
proposes a hierarchical sparse and low-rank regression model
and uses features based on image gradient direction, leading
to a weak low-rankness optimization problem. The model is
suited for occluded face recognition and yields better recognition accuracy. In another work, NNAODL (nuclear norm
based adapted occlusion dictionary learning) [27] has been
proposed to construct corrupted regions and non-corrupted
regions for occluded face recognition. The same occlusion
parts in training images are used to construct the occlusions
while normal training images are used to reconstruct nonocclusion regions, leading to improved computing efficiency.
To cope with occluded face recognition with limited training
samples, Ref. [187] proposes a structural element feature extraction method to capture the local and contextual information
inspired by the human optic nerve characteristics for face
recognition. Besides, an adaptive fusion method is proposed to
use multiple features consisting of a structural element feature,
and a connected-granule labeling feature. It applies Reinforced
Centrosymmetric Local Binary Pattern (RCSLBP) to better
handle the robustness to the occlusion. Finally, few-shot sparse
representation learning is applied for few-shot occluded face
recognition.
4) Deep learning: Face representation obtained by DCNN
is vastly superior to other learning-based methods in discriminative power, owing to the use of massive training
sets [94]. Face verification performance has been boosted due
to advanced deep CNN architectures [47], [68], [127], [131],
[132] and the development of loss functions [25], [86], [87],
[123], [130], [144], [145], [149]. From a practical point of
view, we can obtain occlusion-robust face representation if
a massive training dataset is provided to contain sufficient
occluded faces for a deep network to learn to handle occlusions [190]. However, it is tough to collect such a dataset.
Data augmentation seems to be a plausible solution to obtain
a large number of occluded faces. Training with augmented
occluded faces ensures the features are extracted more locally
and equally [107]. Lv et al. [90] synthesize occluded faces
with various hairstyles and glasses for data augmentation to
enlarge the training dataset, which alleviates the impact of

8

occlusions. Specifically, 87 common hairstyle templates with
various bangs and 100 glasses templates are collected to
synthesize training face images with different hairstyles and
face images with different glasses, to enable the CNN model
is robust to various hairstyles and glasses. The method indeed
relieves the data deficiency problem and results in improved
performance. However, its use is limited to handling sunglasses and hair in recognition and does not solve the occlusion
problem in general. In paper [136], instead of using synthetic
occluded faces directly, they first identify the importance of
face regions in an occlusion sensitivity experiment and then
train a CNN with identified face regions covered to reduce the
model’s reliance on these regions. Specifically, they propose
to augment the training set with face images with occlusions
located in high-effect regions (the central part of the face)
more frequently than in low effect regions (the outer parts of
the face). This forces the model to learn more discriminative
features from the outer parts of the face, resulting in less
degradation when the central part is occluded. However, predefined occlusions may cause performance degradation when
dealing with face images with an occlusion that is not of the
same size. Cen et al. [11] propose a DDRC (deep dictionary
representation based classification) scheme to alleviate the
occlusion effect in face recognition, where the dictionary is
used to linearly code the deep features that are extracted from
a convolutional neural network. The dictionary is composed
of deep features of the training samples and an auxiliary
dictionary associated with the occlusion patterns of the testing
face samples. However, the proposed DDRC assumes that the
occlusion pattern of the test faces is included in the auxiliary
dictionary, which limits its use.
IV. O CCLUSION AWARE FACE RECOGNITION
If only visible facial parts are used for recognition, then
the occlusion problem is mitigated to some extent. These
approaches that explicitly exclude the occlusion area are called
occlusion aware face recognition (OAFR). There are two
groups of methods that constitute OAFR. One is occlusion
detection based face recognition, which detects the occlusions
first and then obtains a representation from the non-occluded
parts only. The other one is partial face recognition, which
assumes that a partial face is available and aims to use a partial
face for recognition. Occlusion detection is ignored during
partial face recognition. A taxonomy of occlusion aware face
recognition is shown in Fig. 6.
A. Occlusion detection based face recognition
To explicitly make use of facial parts for face recognition,
some methods explicitly detect the occlusion and perform face
recognition based on their results. The other techniques obtain
visible facial parts for face recognition based on the prior
knowledge of occlusion, which is called visible part selection.
1) Occlusion detection: An intuitive idea to deal with
occlusions in face recognition is to detect the occlusions
first and then recognize the face based on unoccluded facial
parts. Methods use predefined occlusion types as a substitute
for arbitrary occlusion in different locations to simplify the

Occlusion aware face recognition

A. Occlusion detection based
face recognition

B. Partial face recognition

1) Occlusion detection

1) Feature extraction component

Patch based SVM, Multitask CNN

MD-SCNN

2) Visible part Selection

2) Comparison component

NMF extentions

Multiple classifier system

NMF, LNMF, SFNMF, RDNDL

ERBF, Lophoscopic PCA

Deep learning

Learning classifier

MaskNet, PDSN

MKD/ SIFT/ FCN + SRC ...

Fig. 6.
Method classification used in occlusion aware face recognition
approaches.

occlusion challenge. Usually, scarves and sunglasses are used
as representative occlusions because of their high probability
of appearance in the real world. Based on this idea, Ref. [103]
introduces a 1-NN (nearest neighbor) threshold classifier to
detect the occluded face region in a PCA subspace learned
from training data of occlusion-free patches. Then they apply
the selective local non-negative matrix factorization method
to select features corresponding to occlusion-free regions for
recognition. Some early works [19], [98] employ a binary
classifier to search for the occluded area and incorporate only
the unoccluded parts for comparison. Specifically, they first
divide the face into multiple non-overlapping regions and
then train an SVM classifier to identify whether the facial
patch is occluded or not. By excluding occluded regions,
improved overall recognition accuracy is observed. However,
the performance is far from satisfactory and very sensitive
to the training dataset. Ref. [4] proposes to utilize compressed sensing for occlusion detection by using occluded and
occlusion-free faces of the same identity. For the recognition
process, discriminative information is extracted by excluding
the occluded areas detected.
Since occlusions can corrupt the features of an entire image
in some way, deep learning techniques are developed to
alleviate the problem by producing a better representation.
Ref. [156] designs a convolutional neural network to detect
the occlusion in a multitask setting. More specifically, there
are four region-specific tasks for occlusion detection, and
each aims to predict the occlusion probability of the specific
component: left eye, right eye, nose, and mouth. However,
predicting only predefined occlusions limits flexibility, and
inaccuracy of occlusion detection can, in return, harm the
recognition performance.
2) Visible part selection: Some works select visible facial
parts for recognition and skip occlusion detection by assuming
the prior knowledge of occlusion. Ref. [101] compares several
subspace-based methods including PCA, Non-negative matrix
factorization (NMF) [72], Local NMF [76] and Spatially
Confined NMF [100] and uses the partial information available
for face recognition. During face recognition, the eye region
is selected when people are wearing masks or veils, and the
bottom region is used when people are wearing glasses. This
method has a deficiency in flexibility use because well-aligned

9

predefined subregions are hard to obtain in the real scenario. A
paper [108] in this direction extends NMF to include adaptive
occlusion estimation based on the reconstruction errors. Lowdimensional representations are learned to ensure that features
of the same class are close to that of the mean class center.
This method does not require prior knowledge of occlusions
and can handle large continuous occlusions.
In paper [143], a proposed MaskNet is added to the middle
layer of CNN models, aiming to learn image features with
high fidelity and to ignore those distorted by occlusions.
MaskNet is defined as a shallow convolutional network, which
is expected to assign lower weights to hidden units activated by
the occluded facial areas. Recently, Song et al. [128] propose
a pairwise differential siamese network (PDSN) to build the
correspondence between the occluded facial block and the
corrupted feature elements with a mask learning strategy.
The results show improved performance on synthesized and
realistic occluded face datasets.
B. Partial face recognition
It is worth mentioning that we classify partial face recognition as occlusion aware methods because partial face recognition skips the occlusion detection phase and focuses on face
recognition when arbitrary patches are available, which can be
seen as implicit occlusion awareness. Partial faces frequently
appear in unconstrained scenarios, with images captured by
surveillance cameras or handheld devices (e.g., mobile phones)
in particular. To the best of our knowledge, research for partial
face detection has so far been ignored in literature reviews. It is
essential to search for the semantic correspondence between
the partial face (arbitrary patch) and the entire gallery face
since it is meaningless to compare the features of different
semantic facial parts. The semantic correspondence can be
completed either in the feature extraction phase to extract
invariant and discriminative face features, or in the comparison
phase to construct a robust face classifier. Feature extraction
and comparison methods can be developed to address the
partial face recognition problem. Therefore, we categorize the
methods as feature-aware and comparison-aware methods.
1) Feature extraction component: As for feature-aware
methods, Multiscale Double Supervision Convolutional Neural
Network (MDSCNN) [50] is proposed to have multiple networks trained with facial patches of different scales for feature
extraction. Multiscale patches are cropped from the whole
face and aligned based on their eye-corners. Each network is
training with face patches of a scale. The weights of multiple
networks are combined learned to generate final recognition
accuracy. Even though this method can yield good feature
representations, it is troublesome to train 55 different Double Supervision Convolutional Neural Networks (DSCNNs)
according to different scaled patches. It is time-consuming
in practice because window sliding is needed to generate
multiscale patches for recognition.
2) Comparison component: Comparison-aware methods facilitate the semantic correspondence in the comparison phase
of face recognition. Among the comparison based approaches,
the multiple classifier systems use a voting mechanism to

tolerate the misalignment problem to an extent. In this regard,
Gutta et al. [46] present an Ensemble of Radial Basis Function (ERBF) Networks consisting of nine RBF components,
and each of which is determined according to the number of
clusters and overlap factors. A verification decision is based
on the output generated by the RBFs. In paper [135], they
propose the Lophoscopic PCA method to recognize faces
in the absence of part of the relevant information. For this
purpose, masks (black rectangles) that cover specific regions of
the face, including left eye, right eye, both eyes, nose, mouth,
and no mask are introduced to compute different subspaces.
They learn the weights for each subspace during training.
When classifying the subject, weights regarding each face
subspace are considered and combined for recognition. These
methods are not entirely satisfactory but need improvement,
particularly in terms of their recognition rate.
Alternatively, a learning-based classifier compensates for the
difficulty in the alignment of partial face recognition. Ref. [80]
conducts the first systematic study to recognize an arbitrary
patch of a face image without preliminary requirement on face
alignment, which is regarded as a milestone in the field of
partial face recognition. The proposed method employs the
multi-keypoint descriptors (MKD) to represent a holistic or
partial face with a variable length. Descriptors from a large
gallery construct the dictionary, making it possible to sparsely
represent the descriptors of the partial probe image and infer
the identity of the probe accordingly. However, SRC requires a
sufficient number of faces to cover all possible variations of a
person, which hinders the realization of a practical application.
Even though most learning-based classifier papers are SRC
based, there is a small group that develops similarity measures
to address the partial face recognition problem. Ref. [55]
utilizes the instance-to-class distance to address the partial face
recognition with scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT) descriptors. The similarity between each probe patch and gallery
image is obtained by comparing a set of local descriptors of
one probe image to the nearest neighbor descriptors of all
gallery images with the sparse constraint. As an improvement, Ref. [150] and [151] consider partial face recognition
as a feature set matching problem, where they explicitly
use geometric features and textural features for simultaneous
matching. Robust point set matching (RPSM) [151] considers
both geometric distribution consistency and textural similarity.
Moreover, a constraint on the affine transformation is applied
to prevent unrealistic face warping. However, these methods
would fail to work if face keypoints are unavailable due to
occlusions. Moreover, the computation complexity is high,
which makes the recognition process slow.
Recently, there is a trend to combine the deep learning and
SRC methods to tackle the partial face recognition [48], [49].
Dynamic feature learning [48] combines a fully convolutional
network (FCN) with sparse representation classification (SRC)
for partial face recognition. The sliding window matching
proposed in paper [186] searches for the most similar gallery
part by sliding the window of the same size as the partial
probe. The combination of sliding window matching based
on FCN and SRC brings a promising performance. As an
improved version, Ref. [49] uses multi-scale representations in

10

dynamic feature learning, which increase the ability to tolerate
the misalignment between partial probe patches and the gallery
face.
V. O CCLUSION RECOVERY BASED FACE RECOGNITION
Apart from addressing the occlusion problem in feature
space, one intuitive idea is to take occluded face recovery as a
substitution to solve the occlusion in image space. Occlusion
recovery methods recover a whole face from the occluded
face, which allows the direct application of conventional face
recognition algorithms. Existing occlusion recovery methods
for face recognition use (i) reconstruction based techniques for
face recognition, or (ii) inpainting techniques, which treat the
occluded face as an image repairing problem. A possible way
to classify the methods can be seen in Fig. 7.
Occlusion recovery based face recognition
A. Reconstruction based
face recognition

B. Inpainting

1) Linear reconstruction

1) Non-blind inpainting

PCA, linear combination

Exemplar-based texture synthesis,
FW-PCA

2) Sparse representation classifier
SRC, SSRC, Modular weight based SRC...

3) Deep learning
Double channel autoencoders,
LSTM-Autoencoders

2) Deep learning for blind inpainting
Denoising autoencoder, Context Encoders,
VAE, GAN, InfoGAN, AttGAN, ERGAN, ID-GAN

Fig. 7. Classification of methods used in occlusion recovery based face
recognition approaches.

A. Reconstruction based face recognition
Image-based two-dimensional reconstructions carefully
study the relationship between occluded faces and occlusionfree faces. The reconstruction techniques are classified as linear reconstruction, sparse representation classifier (dictionary
learning), and deep learning techniques.
1) Linear reconstruction: As for reconstruction techniques,
Ref. [112] utilizes PCA reconstruction and recursive error
compensation to remove the eye occlusions caused by glasses.
It combines a Markov Random Field model with a parse
representation of occluded faces to improve the reconstruction
of corrupted facial regions. There are many variants [24], [31],
[73] employing PCA to detect outliers or occlusion and then
reconstruct occlusion-free face images. Ref. [62] estimates
an occluded test image as a linear combination of training
samples of all classes, which allows having occlusions in
training and testing sets. Distinct facial areas are weighted
differently so that only non-occluded facial parts are used for
reconstruction.
2) Sparse representation classifier: The sparse representation classifier [153] is considered to be the pioneering work
on occlusion robust face recognition. This method explores
the discriminative power of sparse representation of a test
face. It uses a linear combination of training samples plus
sparse errors accounting for occlusions or corruption as its

representation. To better tackle the occlusion, the SRC introduces an identity matrix as an occlusion dictionary on
the assumption that the occlusion has a sparse representation
in this dictionary. Ref. [191] improves sparse representation
by including prior knowledge of pixel error distribution. In
paper [26], they design a graph model-based face completion
system for partially occluded face reparation. They leverage
image-based data mining to find the best-matched patch to
guide occluded face synthesis from the images, derived from
the selection of sparse representation classification (SRC). The
final face completion proceeds in the graph-based domain with
the help of graph Laplace.
Similarly, Ref. [78] proposes a reconstruction approach
consisting of occlusion detection and face reconstruction. First,
the downsampled SRC is used to locate all possible occlusions
at a low computing complexity. Second, all discovered face
pixels are imported into an overdetermined equation system
to reconstruct an intact face. An innovative solution for the
occlusion challenge is presented by structured sparse representation based classification (SSRC) [109] to learn an occlusion
dictionary. The regularization term of mutual incoherence
forces the resulting occlusion dictionary to be independent of
the training samples. This method effectively decomposes the
occluded face image into a sparse linear combination of the
training sample dictionary and the occlusion dictionary. The
recognition can be executed on the recovered occlusion-free
face images. Nevertheless, this method requires retraining of
the model to handle the different occlusions.
In paper [185], a new criterion to compute modular weightbased SRC is proposed to address the problem of occluded
face recognition. They partition a face into small modules and
learn the weight function according to the Fisher rate. The
modular weight is used to lessen the effect of modules with
low discriminant and to detect the occlusion module. More
recently, Ref. [60] proposes a robust representation to model
contiguous block occlusions based on two characteristics. The
first characteristic introduces a tailored potential loss function
to fit the errors of distribution. Specifically, a Laplacian sparse
error distribution or more general distributions based on MEstimators. The second characteristic models the error image,
which is the difference between the occluded test face and
the unoccluded training face of the same identity, as low-rank
structural. Wang et al. [147] proposed a method equipped with
two stages: varying occlusion detection stage consisting of occlusion detection and elimination, and iterative recovery stage
consisting of occluded parts being recovered and unoccluded
parts being reserved. With the use of iteratively recovered
strategy, this joint occlusion detecting and recovery method
can produce good global features to benefit classification.
3) Deep learning: A few works use deep learning techniques for occlusion reconstruction. One is work [20], which
extends a stacked sparse denoising autoencoder to a double
channel for facial occlusion removal. It adopts the layerwise
algorithm to learn a representation so that the learned encoding
parameters of clean data can transfer to noisy data. As a
result, the decoding parameters are refined to obtain a noisefree output. The other work [183] proposes to combine the
LSTM and autoencoder architectures to address the face de-

11

occlusion problem. The proposed robust LSTM-Autoencoders
(RLA) model consists of two LSTM components. One spatial
LSTM network encodes face patches of different scales sequentially for robust occlusion encoding, and the other dualchannel LSTM network is used to decode the representation
to reconstruct the face as well as to detect the occlusion.
Additionally, adversarial CNNs are introduced to enhance the
discriminative information in the recovered faces.
B. Inpainting
Image inpainting techniques are widely used to carefully obtain occlusion-free images and are not limited to face images.
Inpainting techniques focus on repairing the occluded images
and leave face recognition out of consideration. They can be
divided into 1) non-blind inpainting and 2) blind inpainting
categories, depending on whether the location information
of corrupted pixels is provided or not. Deep learning is an
effective approach to blind inpainting.
1) Non-blind inpainting: Those techniques fill in the occluded part of an image using the pixels around the missing
region. Exemplar-based techniques that cheaply and effectively
generate new texture by sampling and copying color values
from the source are widely used. In paper [21], a non-blind
inpainting method proposes a unified scheme to determine the
fill order of the target region, using an exemplar-based texture
synthesis technique. The confidence value of each pixel and
image isophotes are combined to determine the priority of
filling. Ref. [64] presents an image inpainting technique to
remove occluded pixels when the occlusion is small. More
specifically, it combines feature extraction and fast weightedprincipal component analysis (FW-PCA) to restore the occluded images. More recently, a hybrid technique [140] has
been proposed where a PDE method and modified exemplar
inpainting is utilized to remark the occluded face region.
However, the occlusion type of face images studied in this
work is not representative of the real scenario.
2) Deep learning for blind inpainting: Generative models
are known for the ability to synthesize or generate new
samples from the same distribution of the training dataset.
The core problem in generative models is to address density
estimation by unsupervised learning, which can be carried out
by explicit density estimation [66], [105], or implicit density
estimation [41]. The most prominent generative models are
originated from the variational autoencoder (VAE) [66] and
the generative adversarial network (GAN) [40], [41]. The
traditional autoencoder is used to reconstruct data, and the
VAE [66] applies probabilistic spin to the traditional autoencoder to allow generating a new image. Having assumed that
training data is generated from the underlying latent representation, the VAE derives a lower bound on the data likelihood
that is tractable and can be optimized. This method is a
principled approach to generative models, and useful features
can be extracted by inference of q(z|x). However, generated
images are blurrier and of low quality. Instead, the GAN [41]
learns to generate a new image from training distribution
using a minimax game between the generator network and the
discriminator network. The discriminator wants to distinguish

between real and fake images, while the generator wants
to fool the discriminator by generating real-looking images.
Ref. [116] uses convolutional architectures in the GAN and can
generate realistic samples. However, the GAN is notorious for
unstable training characteristics. Makhzani et al. [92] propose
an adversarial autoencoder (AAE) to use the GAN framework
as a variational inference in a probabilistic autoencoder to
ensure that generating from any part of prior space results
in meaningful samples.
There are GAN variants for all kinds of applications. We
focus on methods that are relevant to face image editing
and image inpainting. One is a blind-inpainting work [157]
that combines sparse coding [29] and deep neural networks
to tackle image denoising and inpainting. In particular, a
stacked sparse denoising autoencoder is trained to learn the
mapping function from generated corrupted noisy overlapping
image patches to the original noise-free ones. The network
is regularized by a sparsity-inducing term to avoid overfitting. This method does not need prior information about
the missing region and provides solutions to complex pattern
removal like the superimposed text from an image. Context
Encoders [114] combine the encoder-decoder architecture with
context information of the missing part by regarding inpainting
as a context-based pixel prediction problem. Specifically, the
encoder architecture is trained on the input images with missing parts to obtain a latent representation while the decoder
architecture learns to recover the lost information by using
the latent representation. Pixel-wise reconstruction loss and
adversarial loss are jointly used to supervise the context
encoders to learn semantic inpainting results. Several variants
of context encoders [114] are proposed: some extend it by
defining global and local discriminators [59], [77] and some
take the result of context encoders as the input and apply
joint optimization of image content and texture constraints to
avoid visible artifacts around the border of the hole [161].
Ref. [139] relies on the power of the generative network to
complete the corrupted image without requiring an external
training dataset. A partial convolution based network [83] is
proposed to only consider valid pixels and apply a mechanism
that can automatically generate an updated mask, resulting in
robustness to image inpainting for irregular holes. Information
Maximizing Generative Adversarial Networks (InfoGAN) [15]
maximize the mutual information between latent variables and
the observation in an unsupervised way. It decomposes the
input noise vector into the source of incompressible noise z
and the latent code c which will target the salient structured
semantic features of data distribution. By manipulating latent
codes, several visual concepts such as different hairstyles,
presence or absence of eyeglasses are discovered. Occlusionaware GAN [17] is proposed to identify a corrupted image
region with an associated corrupted region recovered using a
GAN pre-trained on occlusion-free faces. Ref. [16] employs
GAN for eyes-to-face synthesis with only eyes visible. Very
recently, AttGAN [51], a face image editing method, has
imposed attribute classification constraints to the generated
image so that the desired attributes are incorporated. Hairstyles
and eyeglasses that may cause occlusion in a face image are
treated as attributes which can be triggered to be present or

12

absent in the generated image. ERGAN (Eyeglasses removal
generative adversarial network) [54] is proposed for eyeglasses
removal in the wild in an unsupervised manner. It is capable
of rendering a competitive removal quality in terms of realism
and diversity. In paper [35], ID-GAN (identity-diversity generative adversarial network) combines a CNN-based recognizer
and GAN-based recognition to inpaint realism and identitypreserving faces. The recognizer is treated as the third player
to compete with the generator.
VI. P ERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we first evaluate the performance of occluded
face detection on the MAFA dataset [36] of partially occluded
faces. Next, we present the performance of face recognition
under occlusion in terms of the identification rate and the
verification accuracy on multiple benchmarks such as the
AR [3], CAS-PEAL [34], and Extended Yale B [37] datasets.
Then we describe the representative algorithms based on the
proposed categories. In addition, we also categorize them in
the face recognition pipeline according to which component
they work on to tackle the occlusion.
A. Evaluation of Occluded Face Detection
There are several datasets for face detection benchmarking,
which are the FDDB [61], PASCAL Face [159], AFW [192],
IJB-A [67], Widerface [166] and MAFA [36] datasets. MAFA
is created for occluded face detection, involving 60 commonly
used masks, such as simple masks, elaborate masks, and
masks consisting of parts of the human body, which occur
in daily life. Besides, it contains 35, 806 face annotations
with a minimum size of 32 × 32 pixels. Some examples
of occluded face images are shown in Fig. 1. To the best
of our knowledge, the MAFA dataset takes the occlusions
as the main challenge in face detection, so it is relevant to
evaluate the capacity of occluded face detection methods.
The performances of representative algorithms on the MAFA
dataset are summarized in Table II (derived from paper [18]).
The precision on the MAFA testing set with the IoU threshold
value 0.5 is shown. Only a few methods report the results
below.
TABLE II
E VALUATION S UMMARY OF D IFFERENT O CCLUDED FACE D ETECTION
A LGORITHMS ON MAFA. T HE SETTING ‘ MASKED ’ ONLY COUNTS THE
FACES ANNOTATED BY THE MAFA DATASET AND ‘ W / O I GNORED ’
COUNTS ALL DETECTED FACES , INCLUDING THE ONES THAT ARE MISSING
ANNOTATION .
Approach

Publication

Precision
‘masked’

Precision
‘w/o Ignored’

Occlusion
unaware

[176]

NA

60.8%

[36]
[146]

NA
76.5%

76.4%
88.3%

[18]

83.5%

91.9%

Occlusion aware
Occlusion
segmentation

B. Existing OFR benchmark datasets
There are numerous standard datasets for general face
recognition, but they are not appropriate for OFR (occluded
face recognition) because occluded faces are barely present
in the datasets. Alternatively, researchers make the most of
the general datasets to generate synthetic occluded datasets by
incorporating synthetic occlusions, occluding rectangles, etc.
Five categories regarding OFR testing scenarios are illustrated
in Fig. 2. In this way, synthetic occluded datasets can meet
the requirements of OFR, where an occlusion-free gallery is
queried using occluded faces.
TABLE III
S UMMARY OF EXISTING BENCHMARK DATASETS FOR OCCLUDED FACE
RECOGNITION . ‘# S UB ’ IS SHORT FOR THE NUMBER OF SUBJECTS . ‘# I MS ’
MEANS THE NUMBER OF IMAGES . ‘R EAL O CC .’ SAYS WHETHER REAL
OCCLUSIONS ARE INCLUDED IN THE ORIGINAL DATASET. ‘S YN . O CC .’ IS
SHORT FOR SYNTHESIZED OCCLUSIONS IMPOSED ON THE ORIGINAL
DATASET TO OBTAIN ‘D- OCC ’.

Dataset

# Sub

# Ims

Real Occ.

Syn. Occ.

AR [3]
Extend YaleB [37]

126

4, 000

Yes

NA

38

161, 289

No

Unrelated Ims

ORL [121]

40

400

No

Rectangle

FERET [110]

1500

13, 000

No

Rectangle

LFW [58]

5749

13, 000

No

Partial Faces

CAS-PEAL [34]

1040

9, 594

Yes

NA

CMU-PIE [43]

68

41, 368

No

Rectangle

PubFig [69]

200

58, 797

No

Partial Faces

NIR-Distance [50]

276

4300

No

Partial Faces

NIR-Mobile [177]

374

11, 286

No

Partial Faces

FRGC [102]

276

943

No

Partial Faces

FRGC-v2 [115]

466

4, 007

No

Partial Faces

We make it a rule to state the ‘D’ as the original dataset, and
‘D-occ’ as the occluded dataset originated from ‘D’. If there is
real occlusion included in the ‘D’, then it is directly used for
establishment. Otherwise, synthesized occlusions are imposed
to form ‘D-occ’ for establishment. Table III summarizes each
dataset by the number of subjects, the number of images,
whether or not real occlusions are included, and if not, what
kind of synthesized occlusions are used to obtain the ‘D-occ’
dataset. Here AR and Extended Yale B, the most widely used
face datasets, are discussed.
AR face database is one of the very few datasets that contain
real occlusions (see Fig. 2 first column). It consists of over
4000 faces of 126 individuals: 70 men and 56 women, taken
in two sessions with a two week interval. There are 13 images
per individual in every session, and these images differ in
terms of facial expression, illumination, and partial occlusion,
getting sunglasses and scarves involved. Index 8 and 11 of
each session indicates the person wearing sunglasses or a scarf,
respectively. Index 9 − 10 and 11 − 12 combine the sunglasses
or the scarf with illuminations, respectively.
Extended Yale B face database contains 161, 289 face
images from 38 persons, each captured under nine poses and
64 different illuminations without occlusion. It is widely used
to evaluate the efficacy of the algorithms under synthesized

13

occlusions. Occluding unrelated images are randomly superimposed on the occlusion-free faces (see Fig. 2 last column).
Typically, gallery images are occlusion-free faces, and test
images are randomly occluded with unrelated images such
as a baboon, or a square image. Sometimes, occluded faces
are occluded with, for example white or black rectangles to
constitute a ‘D-occ’ dataset (see Fig. 2 fourth column).
C. Evaluation of Occluded Face Recognition
In this part, we demonstrate the results of the most representative methods based on the proposed categories. In addition,
we also categorize methods based on the face recognition
pipeline and show evaluation results from this aspect.
1) Evaluation based on the proposed categories: We summarize the identification performances of representative algorithms on the AR database in Table IV. To make sure these
methods can be compared, we group the experimental settings
and introduce the corresponding abbreviation for simplicity as
follows:
(1) Face images for training and testing belong to the same
individual and without overlapping. We use ‘S-TR-Xips’
to abbreviate the situation when the training set contains
X unoccluded images per person. Specifically, ‘S-TRSSPP’ single sample per person in the training set remains
a challenging task. Usually, the gallery set keeps the same
training set if there are no additional announcements. We
add asterisks to mark the gallery, only taking one neutral
face for enrollment.
(2) Face images for training and testing belong to the same
individual, without overlapping. The training set consists
of occluded faces for training, denoting as ‘S-TR-OccX’,
with X as the number of images. Typically, one neutral
face image per individual is enrolled.
(3) Testing subjects are a subset of training subjects denoting
as ‘Ex-TR-SSPP’. Images of extra persons are included
in the training set. Apart from that, the same subjects
are used for training and testing. The training set also
consists of a single sample per person.
(4) There is no overlapping between subjects for training
and testing, which is represented by ‘D-TR’. We use
the setting ‘D-TR-DL’ to indicate if there are large-scale
general data for training with deep learning techniques.
(5) Images of subjects are randomly selected for training,
and the remaining ones are for testing, what we called
‘S-TR-Rand’.
The identification performance of representative algorithms
on extended Yale B as well as other benchmarks is summarized
in Table V. An evaluation summary of different categories
of representative algorithms as regards verification rates is
exhibited in Table VI.
As results on the AR dataset in Table IV show, these
experimental setups were slightly different from paper to
paper, bringing a struggle to interpret these results at the first
sight. This is because the AR dataset does not provide standard
protocols for use, which are essential to compare methods in
a fair ground. Despite the absence of the standard protocols, it
is still possible to get some useful observations and findings.

First, most methods treat session1 of AR as the target and
report the results on sunglasses and scarf individually. Second,
there are some popular protocols gradually formed among
these methods, which can be treated as a relatively fair ground
for comparison. These are (i) S-TR-7IPS, (ii) S-TR-8IPS, and
(iii) S-TR-SSPP. Specifically, S-TR-SSPP in particular has
become a challenge and defines an unambiguous protocol to
follow. Last but not least, thanks to the presence of deep
learning methods, there is a trend to rely on general massive
data for training rather than splitting the AR dataset to form
the training set. There is still some room to improve the OFR
performance, especially when we take the SSPP (single sample
per person) protocol into consideration.
Results on Extended Yale B and other benchmark datasets
are shown in Table V and Table VI. Even though the original
occlusion-free datasets such as Extended Yale B and ORL
are well addressed by current face recognition algorithms, the
‘D-occ’ (occluded version) originated from these datasets still
remains a challenge. It is not surprising that algorithms suffer
severe degradation when 90% of the face parts are occluded
by a rectangle or unrelated images. Moreover, these testing
scenarios are not similar to what we would find in a realistic
scenario. Apart from an occluding rectangle and unrelated images, some methods intend to solve partial face issues by using
arbitrary patches cropped from a face image. Since partial
faces are arbitrary patches, it is hard to be sure algorithms are
on a level playing field. For example, partial faces with eye
regions are supposed to contain more discriminative features
compared to those with no eyes involved.
2) Evaluation based on the face recognition pipeline for
categorization: Generally, occlusion robust feature extraction (ORFE) methods deal with occlusion using feature extraction. However, they sometimes treat occluded face recognition as a semantic correspondence problem and address
the occlusion challenge in the comparison component of
the face recognition pipeline. Similarly, occlusion aware face
recognition (OAFR) usually solves the occluded face recognition using comparison. Nevertheless, some occlusion-aware
techniques use an occlusion-robust dictionary to represent an
occluded face, which lies in the feature extraction component.
Therefore, we categorize methods discussed so far based on
a general face recognition pipeline to offer a fresh perspective (see Table VII). Each component is elaborated as follows:
• Data Augmentation or Data Recovery: augmentation
based techniques cope with the occlusion challenge by
augmenting training data to include possible real-life
occlusion. With the use of deep learning techniques,
occlusion-robust features can be extracted. Recovery
based methods use local or global knowledge to explicitly
fill the occlusion area or de-occlude the face in an implicit
way, for example using an encoder-decoder structure.
• Feature extraction intends to make the most of the locality
characteristic of occlusion using patch-based engineered
feature extraction or applies machine learning or deep
learning to obtain features. Specifically, statistical learning or sparse representation are two commonly used
techniques in this approach.
• Feature comparison: features obtained for an entire face

14

are of fixed length, while features for occluded face
images are determined by the occlusion area and are
therefore of varied length. The comparison phase is used
to find out the semantic correspondence between fixedlength and varied features because it is meaningless to
match different semantic parts.
• Fusion strategy relies on the assumption that occlusions
have less effect on identity recognition compared with
other visible facial areas. Occlusion challenges can be met
by fusing the decision of multiple classifiers or using the
majority voting strategy to minimize the effect of features
extracted from the occlusion.
VII. D ISCUSSION
In this section, future dataset challenges and research
challenges are discussed. In many cases, a new research
challenge means specific dataset requirements. On the other
hand, datasets also reflect underlying challenges that need to
be solved in real life.
A. Future Dataset Challenges
There are three major issues in the datasets referred to:
dataset scale, occlusion diversity, and standard protocol.
The datasets for occluded face recognition are of a small scale.
AR is one of the very few that contain real occlusions and
images of only 126 individuals are included. As for occlusion diversity, sunglasses and scarf occlusions are frequently
considered. However, occlusions in real life are a lot more
diverse than that. Regarding synthesized occlusions, occluding
rectangles and unrelated images are commonly applied. In
the literature, Baboon is a typically used unrelated image to
generate synthetic occluded faces. However, these synthetically occluded faces like those using Baboon, or a black/white
rectangle are not representative of real-life occluded faces.
As regards a standard protocol, the results of representative
approaches obtained from AR and other benchmark datasets
cannot be compared objectively due to a wide diversity of occluded faces. Therefore, future research will have to overcome
three weaknesses in the current datasets. Future benchmark
datasets will contain more individuals, various and sufficient
occlusions, and well-defined evaluation protocols.
Apart from specific requirements for benchmark datasets,
collecting a massive occluded face dataset for training is
also inevitable as we plunge into deep learning techniques.
However, the main source of face images is usually the web,
where labelled faces with occlusions are scarce. How to label
occluded faces efficiently is an open issue that needs to be
resolved because some severely occluded faces are difficult
or impossible to be recognized by humans. From this aspect,
occluded face recognition remains a challenge in the future.
Given the combination of the pose variations, low resolution
etc., recognizing unconstrained faces is far from being solved.
For the development of occluded face recognition techniques, new large-scale datasets are needed that respond to the
occlusion challenges. Recently, IJB-C, a large-scale dataset,
has been made publicly available. It not only contains many

natural occlusions but also provides annotated occlusion locations. The public availability of IJB-C may usher in a new
development of occluded face recognition. In the future, we
expect to see the standard evaluation of fully efficient occluded
face recognition algorithms on the AR dataset as well as on
newly developed real-life and large-scale IJB-C face datasets.
B. Future Research Challenges
In the future, unconstrained occluded face recognition will
become a challenging problem that needs to be addressed.
Unlike the occluded faces we are handling, unconstrained occluded faces should conform to the future benchmark datasets,
not limited by predefined occlusions. Currently used datasets
such as AR and Extended Yale B are both problematic since
they are aligned and captured in a constrained environment.
Apart from unconstrained occluded face recognition, it remains an open issue to resolve face recognition burdened
with unconstrained occlusions and other challenges such as
large pose variations, age gap, low resolution, etc. It is worth
mentioning that unconstrained face recognition usually does
not take the occlusion challenge as the major challenge.
Instead, unconstrained face recognition mainly takes pose and
expression challenges into consideration. Face recognition will
be free from constraints if real-life occlusion plays an equally
important role among these challenges.
Since the existing occluded face recognition approaches
cope with occlusion challenges from distinct perspectives, we
expect the individual improvements in occlusion robust feature
extraction, occlusion aware face recognition, and occlusion
recovery based face recognition. The majority of methods in
the literature so far follow the line of traditional machine
learning techniques. Methods for occluded face recognition
in the future will make use of deep learning techniques,
especially CNN based deep networks. Based on the method
categories in Fig. 3, we suggest a number of ways to develop a
face recognition system that is better able to handle occlusions
as follows.
Novel data augmentation techniques are needed that
could help to learn more discriminative feature representations
robust to occlusions if a CNN deep network is trained on the
augmented dataset. Current solutions for data augmentation
mainly rely on large-scale training data from the web, and use
occlusion templates to generate synthesized occluded faces.
However, manually designed occlusion templates heavily rely
on accurate facial landmarking, and an acceptable occluded
face can only be achieved if the occlusion template is properly
aligned with the facial landmarks. For example, eyeglasses
should be scaled and aligned to the eye centers. One potential
solution is to take advantage of GANs to generate natural
occluded faces by transferring the occlusion type from a real
occluded face to an occlusion-free face.
More effective occlusion recovery models need to be
devised to make the most of state-of-the-art unified face recognition systems. Current occlusion recovery solutions adopt an
encoder-decoder architecture for recovery and are designed for
visually pleasing results rather than accurate reconstruction.
One potential way to resolve this issue is to combine the occlusion recovery task and identification or verification task in

15

a multi-task manner. The adversarial loss can be incorporated
to ensure that the recovered face looks natural.
New occlusion detection techniques need to be designed
to take advantage of massive public datasets. Better occlusion
detection not only makes it possible to generate occlusion
templates automatically but also provides an informative
preprocessing for face recognition. Most methods reviewed
address the occlusion detection problem by partitioning the
face into patches using a binary classifier, resulting in a rough
occlusion area. Combining occlusion detection and occluded
face recognition in a unified framework seems a promising
way, leading to an automatic face recognition system.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we present a thorough survey of face recognition techniques under occlusion and systematically categorize
methods up to now into 1) occlusion robust feature extraction,
2) occlusion aware face recognition, and 3) occlusion recovery
based face recognition. Newly published and innovative papers, especially recent deep learning techniques for occluded
face recognition, have been discussed. Furthermore, we report
comparative performance evaluations in terms of occluded face
detection and face recognition. In the end, we discuss future
challenges in terms of dataset and research (including potential
solutions) that move the field forward.
A PPENDIX
A glossary of abbreviations and expansions for terminologies is illustrated in Table IX.

16

TABLE IV
E VALUATION S UMMARY OF R EPRESENTATIVE A LGORITHMS ON AR DATASET REGARDING IDENTIFICATION RATES . T HREE CATEGORIES ARE :
1) ORFE=O CCLUSION ROBUST F EATURE E XTRACTION , 2) OAFR=O CCLUSION AWARE FACE R ECOGNITION , AND 3) OR EC FR=O CCLUSION
RECOVERY FR. T HE DETAIL OF ‘E XPERIMENT SETTINGS ’ ABBREVIATIONS IS SHOWN . I N COLUMN ‘O CCLUSIONS ,’ THE ASTERISK MEANS SPECIFIC
OCCLUSION UNDER ILLUMINATION . I N COLUMN ‘I DENTIFICATION R ATES ,’ TR MEANS THESE METHODS TRAIN ON SESSION ONE .
Category

Publication

ORFE:
Patch-engineered
Features

[180]
[12]
[93]
[53]
[133]
[153]
[124]
[163]

ORFE:
Learning-based
Features

[109]
[125]
[96]
[33]
[74]
[169]
[162]
[154]
[11]
[35]
[103]

OAFR:
Occlusion Detection
Face Recognition

[98]
[4]
[108]
[128]
[55]

OAFR:
Partial Face Recognition

[150]
[151]
[62]
[191]
[26]

ORecFR:
Occlusion Recovery
Face Recognition

[78]
[89]
[185]
[60]
[147]

Occlusions
Sunglasses
Scarf
Sunglasses
Scarf
Sunglasses
Scarf
Sunglasses
Scarf
Sunglasses
Scarf
Sunglasses
Scarf
Sunglasses&Scarf
Black block
Sunglasses
Scarf
Sunglasses?
Scarf?
Sunglasses&Scarf?
Sunglasses?
Scarf?
Sunglasses?
Scarf?
Sunglasses
Scarf
Sunglasses&Scarf
Sunglasses?
Scarf?
Sunglasses?
Scarf?
Sunglasses&Scarf
Sunglasses&Scarf
Sunglasses
Scarf
Sunglasses
Scarf
Sunglasses
Scarf
Sunglasses?
Scarf?
Sunglasses?
Scarf?
Sunglasses
Scarf
Sunglasses
Scarf
Sunglasses?
Scarf?
Sunglasses&Scarf?
Sunglasses?
Scarf?
Sunglasses&Scarf?
Sunglasses?
Scarf?
Sunglasses&Scarf?
Sunglasses
Scarf
Sunglasses?
Scarf?
Sunglasses?
Sunglasses
Scarf
Sunglasses
Scarf
Sunglasses
Scarf
Sunglasses
Scarf

Experiment
Settings

# of Train
Subjects

S-TR-8IPS

50

50

S-TR-SSPP

100

100

S-TR-SSPP

50

50

S-TR-8IPS

40

40

D-TR

50

50

S-TR-8IPS

100

100

S-TR-3IPS

100

100

S-TR-7IPS

100

100

100

100

S-TR-3IPS

100

100

S-TR-Occ3

100

100

100

100

S-TR-SSPP

80

80

EX-TR-SSPP
D-TR-DL
S-TR-SSPP

80
Webface+20
100

80
80
100

S-TR-7IPS

50

50

S-TR-3IPS

80

80

EX-TR-SSPP

100

100

S-TR-3IPS?

80

80

S-TR-8IPS-Occ1

60

60

S-TR-RAND

100

100

D-TR-DL

Webface

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

S-TR-Occ1

S-TR-SSPP

S-TR-7IPS
S-TR-14IPS
S-TR-7IPS

# of Test
Subjects

S-TR-13IPS

100

100

S-TR-8IPS

100

100

S-TR-7IPS
S-TR-8IPS
S-TR-8IPS

121
100

121
100

100

100

S-TR-3IPS-Occ3

120

120

S-TR-2IPS

100

100

S-TR-4IPS

120

120

Identification Rates (%)
Session1
Session2
84.0
100.0
89.0
73.0

80.0
96.0
98.0
92.0

52.0
48.0
80.0
70.8
98.0
90.0
97.5
93.5
89.0
94.0
92.3
95.0

NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
51.7
84.3
93.0
92.7
92.6

95.7
96.3
TR
TR
TR
TR
TR
88.0
69.0
95.8
90.0
100.0

NA
NA
98.0
97.0
92.0
91.0
82.5
56.0
44.0
78.3
77.9
96.3
75.0

94.7
99.3
99.0
87.6

85.3
98.7
NA
NA

NA
NA
TR
TR
97.5
99.2

49.0
55.0
54.2
81.3
NA
NA
95.2
94.2

99.7
100.0

NA
NA

94.3
98.0
96.2
98.0
97.0
97.5
100.0
100.0

NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
92.0
95.3

TR
100.0
97.0
76.6
60.9
97.5
94.5
95.0
NA
NA

90.6
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
68.5
70.7
89.8
78.8

99.2
87.5

99.7
83.6

17

TABLE V
E VALUATION S UMMARY OF R EPRESENTATIVE A LGORITHMS ON THE OTHER B ENCHMARKS REGARDING IDENTIFICATION RATES . T HREE CATEGORIES :
1) ORFE=O CCLUSION ROBUST F EATURE E XTRACTION , 2) OAFR=O CCLUSION AWARE FACE R ECOGNITION , AND 3) OR EC FR=O CCLUSION
RECOVERY FR. I N THE ‘O CCLUSION A RGUMENTS ’ COLUMN , DETAILS INCLUDING THE SIZE OF OCCLUSION , THE OCCLUSION RATIO TO THE FACE
IMAGE AND PORTION OF NOISE ARE LISTED . I N ‘# OF T RAIN S UBJECTS ,’ NA REPRESENTS NOT AVAILABLE FROM THE PAPER . T HE R ANK 1
IDENTIFICATION RATES ARE SHOWN . S OME RESULTS ARE ROUGHLY ESTIMATED FROM THE FIGURE IN THE ORIGINAL PAPERS . S INCE NOT ALL METHODS
ARE OF THE SAME EXPERIMENTAL SETTINGS , THESE METHODS CANNOT BE COMPARED PROPERLY.

Category

Publication

Occlusions

Occlusion Arguments

Benchmark

[53]
[133]
[153]
[163]
[109]
[96]

Black or White Rectangle
Black Rectangle
Unrelated image
Unrelated image
Unrelated image
Unrelated image

ORL
FERET
Extended Yale B
Extended Yale B
Extended Yale B
Extended Yale B

Glasses&Sunglasses
Hat
Unrelated image
Unrelated image
Random pixels Rectangle
Mixture noise
Unrelated image
Pepper noise
White Rectangle
Salt&Pepper noise
White Rectangle
Black Rectangle
Black Rectangle
Black Rectangle
Unrelated image
Random pixels Rectangle
Black Rectangle

occlusion size:50 × 50
occlusion size:50 × 50
occlusion ratio:0.5
occlusion ratio:0.5
occlusion ratio:0.8
occlusion ratio:0.8
NA
NA
NA
NA
occlusion ratio:0.5
occlusion ratio:0.6
occlusion ratio:0.6
occlusion ratio:0.6
occlusion ratio:0.3
portion:40%
NA
portion:40%
occlusion size:10 × 10
occlusion ratio:0.3
occlusion ratio:0.4
occlusion ratio:0.5
occlusion ratio:0.5
portion:70%
occlusion ratio:0.5

Arbitrary Patches
Arbitrary Patches
Unrelated image
Unrelated image
Arbitrary Patches
Arbitrary Patches
Arbitrary Patches
Arbitrary Patches
Arbitrary Patches
Arbitrary Patches
Arbitrary Patches
Unrelated image
Unrelated image
Multiple patches
Black or White Rectangle
Unrelated image
Black rectangle on eyes
Unrelated image
Unrelated image

[162]
ORFE

[169]
[33]
[74]
[108]

[27]
[32]
[55]
[150]
[151]
OAFR
[48]
[49]
[89]
[191]
ORecFR

[78]
[185]
[60]

Wild condition

# of Train
Subjects

# of Test
Subjects

Identification
Rates(%)

40
240
38
38
38
38
108
851

40
960
38
38
38
38
50
124

Extended Yale B

38

38

CMU-PIE

68

68

70.0
78.5
65.3
87.4
70.0
53.0
86.0
65.3
96.6
90.3
78.4
96.0
81.0
25.0
77.6
81.3
82.9
98.5
98.8
99.2
97.6
96.1
96.9
98.9
93.9

NA
NA
occlusion ratio:0.5
occlusion ratio:0.5
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

Partial-LFW
Partial-LFW
Extended Yale B
Extended Yale B
Partial-PubFig
Partial-LFW
NIR-Distance
Partial-YTF
Partial-LFW
NIR-Distance
NIR-Mobile

158
158
32
32
60
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

158
158
32
32
140
1000
276
200
1000
127
178

34.8
50.7
30.2
56.7
42.9
27.3
94.9
61.0
32.4
92.8
93.8

occlusion ratio:0.7
occlusion ratio:0.7
occlusion ratio:0.8
occlusion ratio:0.57
occlusion ratio:0.5
occlusion ratio:0.3
occlusion ratio:0.6
occlusion ratio:0.9

Extended Yale B

38

38

Extended Yale B

38

38
38

62.3
88.5
96.0
90.4
87.7
98.6
95.8
71.9

LFW
CAS-PEAL

350

350

Extended Yale B

30

30

Extended Yale B

38

38

Extended Yale B

30

30

Extended Yale B

38

38

CMU-PIE

68

68

Extended Yale B

38

38

Extended Yale B

38

Extended Yale B

38

38

Extended Yale B

38

38

TABLE VI
E VALUATION S UMMARY OF R EPRESENTATIVE A LGORITHMS REGARDING VERIFICATION RATES . O CCLUSION ROBUST F EATURE E XTRACTION AND
O CCLUSION AWARE FACE R ECOGNITION REPORT THE VERIFICATION RATES BY CUT- OFF RULES . I N THE ‘B ENCHMARK ’ COLUMN , ‘PARTIAL - X ’ MEANS
THE NEW PARTIAL FACES ORIGINATE FROM THE DATABASE NAMED ‘ X .’ S OME RESULTS ARE ROUGHLY ESTIMATED FROM THE FIGURE IN THE ORIGINAL
PAPERS . S INCE NOT ALL METHODS ARE OF THE SAME EXPERIMENTAL SETTINGS , THESE METHODS CANNOT BE COMPARED PROPERLY.
Publication

Occlusions

Benchmark

# of Subjects in Gallery

Verification Rates

[122]
[57]
[96]

Eyeglasses
Wild condition
Wild condition

FRGC-v2
LFW
LFW

466
1680
1680

90%@FAR=0.1%
60%@FAR=0.1
61%@FAR=0.1

Arbitrary Patches
Arbitrary Patches
Arbitrary Patches
Arbitrary Patches

Partial-LFW
Partial-PubFig
Partial-LFW
Partial-LFW

1680
140
1000
1000

50%@FAR=0.1
63%@FAR=0.1
29.8%@FAR=0.1%
37.9%@FAR=0.1%

[151]
[48]
[49]

18

TABLE VII
S UMMARY OF R EPRESENTATIVE A LGORITHMS BASED ON COMPONENTS THEY WORK ON DURING OFR. I N THE ‘ DATA AUGMENTATION / RECOVERY ’
CATEGORY, DATA AUGMENTATION COMPONENT MEANS GENERATING SYNTHESIZED OCCLUDED FACES WHILE THE DATA RECOVERY COMPONENT
INTENDS TO ELIMINATE THE OCCLUDED FACIAL PART. T HE FUSION STRATEGY COMPONENT CONSISTS OF FEATURE - LEVEL FUSION AS WELL AS
DECISION - LEVEL FUSION .
Pipeline Category

Publication

Data Augmentation/ Recovery

[15], [20], [21], [24], [26], [31], [35], [51], [54], [62], [64], [73], [78], [89], [90], [107], [112], [136], [140], [147],
[183]

Feature Extraction

[1], [2], [11], [23], [27], [32], [33], [48], [49], [53], [60], [62], [65], [74], [80], [88], [93], [108], [109], [124], [125],
[128], [134], [143], [148], [153], [162], [163], [169], [180], [187], [191], [193]

Feature Comparison

[4], [19], [55], [57], [96], [98], [101], [133], [150]–[152]

Fusion Strategy

[12], [46], [50], [103], [111], [122], [135], [185], [187]

TABLE VIII
S UMMARY OF R EPRESENTATIVE A LGORITHMS REGARDING APPLICATION - ORIENTED PURPOSE FROM F IG . 3. T HERE IS A CATEGORY FOR OCCLUDED
FACE DETECTION WITH THE ABBREVIATION ‘OFD’. T HREE CLASSES FOR OCCLUDED FACE RECOGNITION : 1) ORFE=O CCLUSION ROBUST F EATURE
E XTRACTION , 2) OAFR=O CCLUSION AWARE FACE R ECOGNITION , AND 3) ORFR=O CCLUSION RECOVERY FR. T O OUR KNOWLEDGE , THERE ARE NO
RESEARCH WORKS ON DETECTING PARTIAL FACE ; THUS , WE MARK IT AS ‘NA’ ( NOT AVAILABLE ).
Abbreviation

Application-oriented Purpose

Publication

OFD

Occluded Face Detection

[14], [18], [36], [61], [61], [91], [106], [120], [146], [155], [159], [165], [165]–[167], [174],
[192]

ORFE

Patch based engineered features
Learning based features

[1], [2], [12], [23], [57], [65], [88], [111], [122], [180], [181], [193]
[11], [27], [31]–[33], [53], [65], [73], [74], [90], [93], [96], [107], [109], [124], [125], [133],
[134], [136], [148], [153], [162], [163], [169], [187]

Occlusion Detection
Occlusion Discard Face Recognition
Partial Face Detection
Partial Face Recognition

[18], [156]
[4], [19], [98], [101], [103], [108], [128], [143]
NA
[46], [48]–[50], [55], [80], [150], [151]

Occlusion Recovery
Occlusion Recovery Face Recognition

[15]–[17], [20], [21], [29], [51], [54], [59], [64], [77], [83], [114], [139], [140], [157], [161]
[24], [26], [31], [35], [60], [62], [73], [78], [89], [112], [147], [183], [185], [191]

OAFR

ORFR

TABLE IX
A GLOSSARY OF ABBREVIATIONS AND EXPANSIONS FOR TERMINOLOGIES .
Abbreviation

Expansion

Abbreviation

Expansion

AAE
AFC
AOFD
CSLBP
DA
DCNNs
DDRC
DMSC
DoG
DPM
DSCNNs
EBGM
ECSLBP
ELOC
ERBF
ERGAN
FAN
FANet
FCN
FW-PCA
GAN
GRRC
HOG
ICA
ID-GAN
InfoGAN
KCFA
KLD-LGBP

Adversarial AutoEncoder
Adaptive Feature Convolution
Adversarial Occlusion-aware Face Detection
Center-Symmetric Local Binary Patterns
Denosing Autoencoder
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
Deep Dictionary Representation based Classification
Discriminative Multiscale Sparse Coding
Different of Gaussian filters
Deformable Part Models
Double Supervision Convolutional Neural Network
Elastic Bunch Graph Matching
Enhanced Center-Symmetric Local Binary Patterns
Efficient Locality-constrained Occlusion Coding
Ensemble of Radial Basis Function
Eyeglasses Removal Generative Adversarial Network
Face Attention Network
Feature Agglomeration Networks
Fully Convolutional Network
Fast Weighted-Principal Component Analysis
Generative Adversarial Network
Gabor based Robust Representation and Classification
Histogram of Oriented Gradient
Independent Component Analysis
Identity-Diversity Generative Adversarial Network
Information maximizing Generative Adversarial Network
Kernel Correlation Feature Analysis
Kullback-Leibler Divergence-Local Gabor Binary Patterns

LBP
LDA
LLE
LSTM
MDSCNN
MKD
NNAODL
NMF
OAFR
OFR
ORFE
ORecFR
PCA
PDSN
R-CNN
RCSLBP
RDLRR
RLA
RPSM
SIFT
SOC
SOM
SRC
SSD
SSRC
SVM
VAE
YOLO

Local Binary Patterns
Linear Discriminant Analysis
Locally Linear Embedding
Long Short Term Memory
Multiscale Double Convolutional Neural Network
Multi-Keypoint Descriptors
Nuclear Norm based Adapted Occlusion Dictionary Learning
Non-negative Matrix Factorization
Occlusion Aware Face Recognition
Occluded Face Recognition
Occlusion Robust Feature Extraction
Occlusion Recovery based Face Recognition
Principal Component Analysis
Pairwise Differential Siamese Network
Regions with Convolutional Neural Networks
Reinforced Centrosymmetric Local Binary Pattern
Robust Discriminative Low-Rank Representation
Robust LSTM-Autoencoders
Robust Point Set Matching
Scale Invariant Feature Transform
Structured Occlusion Coding
Self-Organizing Maps
Sparse Representation Classifiers
Single-Shot multibox Detector
Structured Sparse Representation Classification
Support Vector Machine
Variational AutoEncoder
You Only Look Once

19

R EFERENCES
[1] Timo Ahonen, Abdenour Hadid, and Matti Pietikäinen. Face recognition with local binary patterns. In European conference on computer
vision, pages 469–481. Springer, 2004.
[2] Timo Ahonen, Abdenour Hadid, and Matti Pietikainen. Face description with local binary patterns: Application to face recognition.
IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence,
28(12):2037–2041, 2006.
[3] Martı́nez Aleix and Benavente Robert. The AR face database. CVC
Tech. Rep, 24, Jun 1998.
[4] A Morelli Andrés, Sebastian Padovani, Mariano Tepper, and Julio
Jacobo-Berlles. Face recognition on partially occluded images using
compressed sensing. Pattern Recognition Letters, 36:235–242, 2014.
[5] Aisha Azeem, Muhammad Sharif, Mudassar Raza, and Marryam Murtaza. A survey: Face recognition techniques under partial occlusion.
Int. Arab J. Inf. Technol., 11(1):1–10, 2014.
[6] Yancheng Bai, Yongqiang Zhang, Mingli Ding, and Bernard Ghanem.
Finding tiny faces in the wild with generative adversarial network. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 21–30, 2018.
[7] Ankan Bansal, Anirudh Nanduri, Carlos D Castillo, Rajeev Ranjan, and
Rama Chellappa. Umdfaces: An annotated face dataset for training
deep networks. In 2017 IEEE International Joint Conference on
Biometrics (IJCB), pages 464–473. IEEE, 2017.
[8] Peter N Belhumeur, João P Hespanha, and David J Kriegman. Eigenfaces vs. fisherfaces: Recognition using class specific linear projection.
Technical report, Yale University New Haven United States, 1997.
[9] Lacey Best-Rowden and Anil K Jain. Longitudinal study of automatic
face recognition. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine
intelligence, 40(1):148–162, 2018.
[10] Qiong Cao, Li Shen, Weidi Xie, Omkar M Parkhi, and Andrew
Zisserman. Vggface2: A dataset for recognising faces across pose and
age. In 2018 13th IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face
& Gesture Recognition (FG 2018), pages 67–74. IEEE, 2018.
[11] Feng Cen and Guanghui Wang. Dictionary representation of deep
features for occlusion-robust face recognition. IEEE Access, 7:26595–
26605, 2019.
[12] Ismahane Cheheb, Noor Al-Maadeed, Somaya Al-Madeed, Ahmed
Bouridane, and Richard Jiang. Random sampling for patch-based
face recognition. In Biometrics and Forensics (IWBF), 2017 5th
International Workshop on, pages 1–5. IEEE, 2017.
[13] Dong Chen, Shaoqing Ren, Yichen Wei, Xudong Cao, and Jian Sun.
Joint cascade face detection and alignment. In European conference
on computer vision, pages 109–122. Springer, 2014.
[14] Jie Chen, Shiguang Shan, Shengye Yang, Xilin Chen, and Wen Gao.
Modification of the adaboost-based detector for partially occluded
faces. In 18th International Conference on Pattern Recognition
(ICPR’06), volume 2, pages 516–519. IEEE, 2006.
[15] Xi Chen, Yan Duan, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever,
and Pieter Abbeel. Infogan: Interpretable representation learning by
information maximizing generative adversarial nets. In Advances in
neural information processing systems, pages 2172–2180, 2016.
[16] Xiang Chen, Linbo Qing, Xiaohai He, Jie Su, and Yonghong Peng.
From eyes to face synthesis: a new approach for human-centered smart
surveillance. IEEE access, 6:14567–14575, 2018.
[17] Yu-An Chen, Wei-Che Chen, Chia-Po Wei, and Yu-Chiang Frank
Wang. Occlusion-aware face inpainting via generative adversarial
networks. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing
(ICIP), pages 1202–1206. IEEE, 2017.
[18] Yujia Chen, Lingxiao Song, and Ran He. Masquer hunter: Adversarial
occlusion-aware face detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.05188,
2017.
[19] Zhaohua Chen, Tingrong Xu, and Zhiyuan Han. Occluded face
recognition based on the improved svm and block weighted lbp.
In Image Analysis and Signal Processing (IASP), 2011 International
Conference on, pages 118–122. IEEE, 2011.
[20] Lele Cheng, Jinjun Wang, Yihong Gong, and Qiqi Hou. Robust deep
auto-encoder for occluded face recognition. In Proceedings of the 23rd
ACM international conference on Multimedia, pages 1099–1102. ACM,
2015.
[21] Antonio Criminisi, Patrick Pérez, and Kentaro Toyama. Region
filling and object removal by exemplar-based image inpainting. IEEE
Transactions on image processing, 13(9):1200–1212, 2004.
[22] Nicole Dagnes, Enrico Vezzetti, Federica Marcolin, and Stefano Tornincasa. Occlusion detection and restoration techniques for 3d face

recognition: a literature review. Machine Vision and Applications,
29:789–813, 2018.
[23] Navneet Dalal and Bill Triggs. Histograms of oriented gradients
for human detection. In 2005 IEEE computer society conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition (CVPR’05), volume 1, pages
886–893. IEEE, 2005.
[24] Fernando De La Torre and Michael J Black. A framework for robust
subspace learning. International Journal of Computer Vision, 54(13):117–142, 2003.
[25] Jiankang Deng, Jia Guo, Niannan Xue, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. Arcface: Additive angular margin loss for deep face recognition. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 4690–4699, 2019.
[26] Yue Deng, Qionghai Dai, and Zengke Zhang. Graph laplace for
occluded face completion and recognition. IEEE Transactions on Image
Processing, 20(8):2329–2338, 2011.
[27] Lingshuang Du and Haifeng Hu. Nuclear norm based adapted occlusion
dictionary learning for face recognition with occlusion and illumination
changes. Neurocomputing, 340:133–144, 2019.
[28] Hazım Kemal Ekenel and Rainer Stiefelhagen. Why is facial occlusion
a challenging problem? In International Conference on Biometrics,
pages 299–308. Springer, 2009.
[29] Michael Elad and Michal Aharon. Image denoising via sparse and
redundant representations over learned dictionaries. IEEE Transactions
on Image processing, 15(12):3736–3745, 2006.
[30] Sachin Sudhakar Farfade, Mohammad J Saberian, and Li-Jia Li. Multiview face detection using deep convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM on International Conference on Multimedia
Retrieval, pages 643–650. ACM, 2015.
[31] Sanja Fidler, Danijel Skocaj, and Ales Leonardis. Combining reconstructive and discriminative subspace methods for robust classification
and regression by subsampling. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, 28(3):337–350, 2006.
[32] Yuli Fu, Xiaosi Wu, Yandong Wen, and Youjun Xiang. Efficient
locality-constrained occlusion coding for face recognition. Neurocomputing, 260:104–111, 2017.
[33] Guangwei Gao, Jian Yang, Xiao-Yuan Jing, Fumin Shen, Wankou
Yang, and Dong Yue. Learning robust and discriminative low-rank
representations for face recognition with occlusion. Pattern Recognition, 66:129–143, 2017.
[34] Wen Gao, Bo Cao, Shiguang Shan, Xilin Chen, Delong Zhou, Xiaohua
Zhang, and Debin Zhao. The cas-peal large-scale chinese face database
and baseline evaluations. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics-Part A: Systems and Humans, 38(1):149–161, 2008.
[35] Shiming Ge, Chenyu Li, Shengwei Zhao, and Dan Zeng. Occluded
face recognition in the wild by identity-diversity inpainting. IEEE
Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, 2020.
[36] Shiming Ge, Jia Li, Qiting Ye, and Zhao Luo. Detecting masked faces
in the wild with lle-cnns. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 2682–2690, 2017.
[37] Athinodoros S Georghiades, Peter N Belhumeur, and David J Kriegman. From few to many: Illumination cone models for face recognition
under variable lighting and pose. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis & Machine Intelligence, (6):643–660, 2001.
[38] Ross Girshick. Fast r-cnn. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision, pages 1440–1448, 2015.
[39] Ross Girshick, Jeff Donahue, Trevor Darrell, and Jitendra Malik.
Rich feature hierarchies for accurate object detection and semantic
segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pages 580–587, 2014.
[40] Ian Goodfellow. Nips 2016 tutorial: Generative adversarial networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.00160, 2016.
[41] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David
Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in neural information processing
systems, pages 2672–2680, 2014.
[42] Rajkiran Gottumukkal and Vijayan K Asari. An improved face recognition technique based on modular pca approach. Pattern Recognition
Letters, 25(4):429–436, 2004.
[43] Ralph Gross, Iain Matthews, Jeffrey Cohn, Takeo Kanade, and Simon
Baker. Multi-pie. Image and Vision Computing, 28(5):807–813, 2010.
[44] Yandong Guo, Lei Zhang, Yuxiao Hu, Xiaodong He, and Jianfeng
Gao. Ms-celeb-1m: A dataset and benchmark for large-scale face
recognition. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 87–
102. Springer, 2016.

20

[45] Zhixin Guo, Wenzhi Liao, Peter Veelaert, and Wilfried Philips.
Occlusion-robust detector trained with occluded pedestrians.
SCITEPRESS-Science and Technology Publications, 2018.
[46] Srinivas Gutta, Vasanth Philomin, and Miroslav Trajkovic. An investigation into the use of partial-faces for face recognition. In fgr, pages
33–38, 2002.
[47] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep
residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 770–778,
2016.
[48] Lingxiao He, Haiqing Li, Qi Zhang, and Zhenan Sun. Dynamic feature
learning for partial face recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 7054–
7063, 2018.
[49] Lingxiao He, Haiqing Li, Qi Zhang, and Zhenan Sun. Dynamic feature
matching for partial face recognition. IEEE Transactions on Image
Processing, 28(2):791–802, 2019.
[50] Lingxiao He, Haiqing Li, Qi Zhang, Zhenan Sun, and Zhaofeng
He. Multiscale representation for partial face recognition under near
infrared illumination. In Biometrics Theory, Applications and Systems
(BTAS), 2016 IEEE 8th International Conference on, pages 1–7. IEEE,
2016.
[51] Zhenliang He, Wangmeng Zuo, Meina Kan, Shiguang Shan, and Xilin
Chen. Attgan: Facial attribute editing by only changing what you want.
IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 28(11):5464–5478, 2019.
[52] Jan Hosang, Mohamed Omran, Rodrigo Benenson, and Bernt Schiele.
Taking a deeper look at pedestrians. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 4073–
4082, 2015.
[53] Kazuhiro Hotta. Robust face recognition under partial occlusion based
on support vector machine with local gaussian summation kernel.
Image and Vision Computing, 26(11):1490–1498, 2008.
[54] Bingwen Hu, Wankou Yang, and Mingwu Ren. Unsupervised eyeglasses removal in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.06989, 2019.
[55] Junlin Hu, Jiwen Lu, and Yap-Peng Tan. Robust partial face recognition
using instance-to-class distance. In Visual Communications and Image
Processing (VCIP), 2013, pages 1–6. IEEE, 2013.
[56] Peiyun Hu and Deva Ramanan. Finding tiny faces. In Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
pages 951–959, 2017.
[57] Gang Hua and Amir Akbarzadeh. A robust elastic and partial matching
metric for face recognition. In Computer Vision, 2009 IEEE 12th
International Conference on, pages 2082–2089. IEEE, 2009.
[58] Gary B. Huang, Manu Ramesh, Tamara Berg, and Erik Learned-Miller.
Labeled faces in the wild: A database for studying face recognition in
unconstrained environments. Technical Report 07-49, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst, October 2007.
[59] Satoshi Iizuka, Edgar Simo-Serra, and Hiroshi Ishikawa. Globally and
locally consistent image completion. ACM Transactions on Graphics
(ToG), 36(4):1–14, 2017.
[60] Michael Iliadis, Haohong Wang, Rafael Molina, and Aggelos K Katsaggelos. Robust and low-rank representation for fast face identification
with occlusions. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 26(5):2203–
2218, 2017.
[61] Vidit Jain and Erik Learned-Miller. Fddb: A benchmark for face
detection in unconstrained settings. Technical report, UMass Amherst
Technical Report, 2010.
[62] Hongjun Jia and Aleix M Martinez. Face recognition with occlusions in
the training and testing sets. In 2008 8th IEEE International Conference
on Automatic Face & Gesture Recognition, pages 1–6. IEEE, 2008.
[63] Huaizu Jiang and Erik Learned-Miller. Face detection with the faster
r-cnn. In 2017 12th IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face
& Gesture Recognition (FG 2017), pages 650–657. IEEE, 2017.
[64] Sandesh V Khamele and Shyamal G Mundada. An approach for
restoring occluded images for face-recognition. Int J Adv Res Comput
Commun Eng, 4(17):571–575, 2015.
[65] Jongsun Kim, Jongmoo Choi, Juneho Yi, and Matthew Turk. Effective
representation using ica for face recognition robust to local distortion
and partial occlusion. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and
machine intelligence, 27(12):1977–1981, 2005.
[66] Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
[67] Brendan F Klare, Ben Klein, Emma Taborsky, Austin Blanton, Jordan
Cheney, Kristen Allen, Patrick Grother, Alan Mah, and Anil K Jain.
Pushing the frontiers of unconstrained face detection and recognition:
Iarpa janus benchmark a. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 1931–1939, 2015.

[68] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet
classification with deep convolutional neural networks. In Advances in
neural information processing systems, pages 1097–1105, 2012.
[69] Neeraj Kumar, Alexander C Berg, Peter N Belhumeur, and Shree K
Nayar. Attribute and simile classifiers for face verification. In 2009
IEEE 12th International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 365–
372. IEEE, 2009.
[70] Badr Lahasan, Syaheerah Lebai Lutfi, and Rubén San-Segundo. A
survey on techniques to handle face recognition challenges: occlusion,
single sample per subject and expression. Artificial Intelligence Review,
pages 1–31, 2017.
[71] Erik Learned-Miller, Gary B Huang, Aruni RoyChowdhury, Haoxiang
Li, and Gang Hua. Labeled faces in the wild: A survey. In Advances
in face detection and facial image analysis, pages 189–248. Springer,
2016.
[72] Daniel D Lee and H Sebastian Seung. Learning the parts of objects
by non-negative matrix factorization. Nature, 401(6755):788, 1999.
[73] Aleš Leonardis and Horst Bischof. Robust recognition using eigenimages. Computer Vision and Image Understanding, 78(1):99–118,
2000.
[74] Chen Li, Shuai Zhao, Wei Song, Ke Xiao, and Yanjie Wang. Ubiquitous single-sample face recognition under occlusion based on sparse
representation with dual features. Journal of Ambient Intelligence and
Humanized Computing, pages 1–11, 2017.
[75] Haoxiang Li, Zhe Lin, Xiaohui Shen, Jonathan Brandt, and Gang
Hua. A convolutional neural network cascade for face detection. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 5325–5334, 2015.
[76] Stan Z Li, Xin Wen Hou, Hong Jiang Zhang, and Qian Sheng Cheng.
Learning spatially localized, parts-based representation. In Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2001. CVPR 2001. Proceedings of the
2001 IEEE Computer Society Conference on, volume 1, pages I–I.
IEEE, 2001.
[77] Yijun Li, Sifei Liu, Jimei Yang, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Generative
face completion. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 3911–3919, 2017.
[78] Yuelong Li and Jufu Feng. Reconstruction based face occlusion
elimination for recognition. Neurocomputing, 101:68–72, 2013.
[79] Zhihang Li, Xu Tang, Junyu Han, Jingtuo Liu, and Ran He. Pyramidbox++: High performance detector for finding tiny face. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.00386, 2019.
[80] Shengcai Liao, Anil K Jain, and Stan Z Li. Partial face recognition:
Alignment-free approach. IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and
machine intelligence, 35(5):1193–1205, 2013.
[81] Shengcai Liao, Xiangxin Zhu, Zhen Lei, Lun Zhang, and Stan Z Li.
Learning multi-scale block local binary patterns for face recognition.
In International Conference on Biometrics, pages 828–837. Springer,
2007.
[82] Tsung-Yi Lin, Piotr Dollár, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, Bharath
Hariharan, and Serge Belongie. Feature pyramid networks for object
detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 2117–2125, 2017.
[83] Guilin Liu, Fitsum A Reda, Kevin J Shih, Ting-Chun Wang, Andrew
Tao, and Bryan Catanzaro. Image inpainting for irregular holes using
partial convolutions. In Proceedings of the European Conference on
Computer Vision (ECCV), pages 85–100, 2018.
[84] Hao Liu, Huiping Duan, Hongyu Cui, and Yunjie Yin. Face recognition
using training data with artificial occlusions. In 2016 Visual Communications and Image Processing (VCIP), pages 1–4. IEEE, 2016.
[85] Wei Liu, Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Christian Szegedy, Scott
Reed, Cheng-Yang Fu, and Alexander C Berg. Ssd: Single shot
multibox detector. In European conference on computer vision, pages
21–37. Springer, 2016.
[86] Weiyang Liu, Yandong Wen, Zhiding Yu, Ming Li, Bhiksha Raj,
and Le Song. Sphereface: Deep hypersphere embedding for face
recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, pages 212–220, 2017.
[87] Weiyang Liu, Yandong Wen, Zhiding Yu, and Meng Yang. Largemargin softmax loss for convolutional neural networks. In ICML,
volume 2, page 7, 2016.
[88] David G Lowe. Object recognition from local scale-invariant features.
In Proceedings of the seventh IEEE international conference on computer vision, volume 2, pages 1150–1157. IEEE, 1999.
[89] Xiao Luan, Bin Fang, Linghui Liu, Weibin Yang, and Jiye Qian.
Extracting sparse error of robust pca for face recognition in the
presence of varying illumination and occlusion. Pattern Recognition,
47(2):495–508, 2014.

21

[90] Jiang-Jing Lv, Xiao-Hu Shao, Jia-Shui Huang, Xiang-Dong Zhou, and
Xi Zhou. Data augmentation for face recognition. Neurocomputing,
230:184–196, 2017.
[91] Upal Mahbub, Vishal M Patel, Deepak Chandra, Brandon Barbello, and
Rama Chellappa. Partial face detection for continuous authentication.
In Image Processing (ICIP), 2016 IEEE International Conference on,
pages 2991–2995. IEEE, 2016.
[92] Alireza Makhzani, Jonathon Shlens, Navdeep Jaitly, Ian Goodfellow, and Brendan Frey. Adversarial autoencoders. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1511.05644, 2015.
[93] Aleix M Martı́nez. Recognizing imprecisely localized, partially
occluded, and expression variant faces from a single sample per
class. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis & Machine Intelligence,
(6):748–763, 2002.
[94] Iacopo Masi, Yue Wu, Tal Hassner, and Prem Natarajan. Deep face
recognition: A survey. In 2018 31st SIBGRAPI conference on graphics,
patterns and images (SIBGRAPI), pages 471–478. IEEE, 2018.
[95] Brianna Maze, Jocelyn Adams, James A Duncan, Nathan Kalka, Tim
Miller, Charles Otto, Anil K Jain, W Tyler Niggel, Janet Anderson,
Jordan Cheney, et al. Iarpa janus benchmark-c: Face dataset and
protocol. In 2018 International Conference on Biometrics (ICB), pages
158–165. IEEE, 2018.
[96] Niall McLaughlin, Ji Ming, and Danny Crookes. Largest matching
areas for illumination and occlusion robust face recognition. IEEE
transactions on cybernetics, 47(3):796–808, 2017.
[97] Mostafa Mehdipour Ghazi and Hazim Kemal Ekenel. A comprehensive
analysis of deep learning based representation for face recognition. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition workshops, pages 34–41, 2016.
[98] Rui Min, Abdenour Hadid, and Jean-Luc Dugelay. Improving the
recognition of faces occluded by facial accessories. In Automatic
Face & Gesture Recognition and Workshops (FG 2011), 2011 IEEE
International Conference on, pages 442–447. IEEE, 2011.
[99] Aaron Nech and Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman. Level playing field for
million scale face recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 7044–7053, 2017.
[100] Han Foon Neo, Andrew Beng Jin Teoh, and David Chek Ling Ngo.
A novel spatially confined non-negative matrix factorization for face
recognition. In MVA, pages 502–505. Citeseer, 2005.
[101] HF Neo, CC Teo, and Andrew BJ Teoh. Development of partial
face recognition framework. In Computer Graphics, Imaging and
Visualization (CGIV), 2010 Seventh International Conference on, pages
142–146. IEEE, 2010.
[102] University of Notre Dame. University of notre dame biometrics
database, 2008. http://www.nd.edu/∼cvrl.
[103] Hyun Jun Oh, Kyoung Mu Lee, and Sang Uk Lee. Occlusion invariant
face recognition using selective local non-negative matrix factorization
basis images. Image and Vision computing, 26(11):1515–1523, 2008.
[104] Muhtahir O Oloyede, Gerhard P Hancke, and Nellore Kapileswar.
Evaluating the effect of occlusion in face recognition systems. In
AFRICON, 2017 IEEE, pages 1547–1551. IEEE, 2017.
[105] Aaron van den Oord, Nal Kalchbrenner, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Pixel
recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1601.06759, 2016.
[106] Michael Opitz, Georg Waltner, Georg Poier, Horst Possegger, and Horst
Bischof. Grid loss: Detecting occluded faces. In European conference
on computer vision, pages 386–402. Springer, 2016.
[107] Elad Osherov and Michael Lindenbaum. Increasing cnn robustness
to occlusions by reducing filter support. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 550–561, 2017.
[108] Weihua Ou, Xiao Luan, Jianping Gou, Quan Zhou, Wenjun Xiao,
Xiangguang Xiong, and Wu Zeng. Robust discriminative nonnegative
dictionary learning for occluded face recognition. Pattern Recognition
Letters, 107:41–49, 2018.
[109] Weihua Ou, Xinge You, Dacheng Tao, Pengyue Zhang, Yuanyan
Tang, and Ziqi Zhu. Robust face recognition via occlusion dictionary
learning. Pattern Recognition, 47(4):1559–1572, 2014.
[110] S. A. Rizvi P. J. Phillips, H. Moon and P. J. RaussD. The feret evaluation methodology for face-recognition algorithms. IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis & Machine Intelligence, (10):1090–1104, 2000.
[111] Ke Pan, Shengcai Liao, Zhijian Zhang, Stan Z Li, and Peiren Zhang.
Part-based face recognition using near infrared images. In 2007 IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1–6.
IEEE, 2007.
[112] Jeong-Seon Park, You Hwa Oh, Sang Chul Ahn, and Seong-Whan
Lee. Glasses removal from facial image using recursive error compensation. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence,
27(5):805–811, 2005.

[113] Omkar M Parkhi, Andrea Vedaldi, Andrew Zisserman, et al. Deep face
recognition. In bmvc, volume 1, page 6, 2015.
[114] Deepak Pathak, Philipp Krahenbuhl, Jeff Donahue, Trevor Darrell, and
Alexei A Efros. Context encoders: Feature learning by inpainting. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 2536–2544, 2016.
[115] P Jonathon Phillips, Patrick J Flynn, Todd Scruggs, Kevin W Bowyer,
Jin Chang, Kevin Hoffman, Joe Marques, Jaesik Min, and William
Worek. Overview of the face recognition grand challenge. In 2005
IEEE computer society conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition (CVPR’05), volume 1, pages 947–954. IEEE, 2005.
[116] Alec Radford, Luke Metz, and Soumith Chintala. Unsupervised
representation learning with deep convolutional generative adversarial
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06434, 2015.
[117] Joseph Redmon, Santosh Divvala, Ross Girshick, and Ali Farhadi. You
only look once: Unified, real-time object detection. In Proceedings of
the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages
779–788, 2016.
[118] Min Ren, Yunlong Wang, Zhenan Sun, and Tieniu Tan. Dynamic
graph representation for partially occluded biometrics. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1912.00377, 2019.
[119] Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Jian Sun. Faster r-cnn:
Towards real-time object detection with region proposal networks. In
Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 91–99, 2015.
[120] Pouya Samangouei, Vishal M Patel, and Rama Chellappa. Attributebased continuous user authentication on mobile devices. In 2015 IEEE
7th International Conference on Biometrics Theory, Applications and
Systems (BTAS), pages 1–8. IEEE, 2015.
[121] Ferdinando S Samaria and Andy C Harter. Parameterisation of a
stochastic model for human face identification. In Proceedings of 1994
IEEE Workshop on Applications of Computer Vision, pages 138–142.
IEEE, 1994.
[122] Marios Savvides, Ramzi Abiantun, Jingu Heo, S Park, Chunyan Xie,
and BVK Vijayakumar. Partial & holistic face recognition on frgc-ii
data using support vector machine. In Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition Workshop, 2006. CVPRW’06. Conference on, pages 48–48.
IEEE, 2006.
[123] Florian Schroff, Dmitry Kalenichenko, and James Philbin. Facenet: A
unified embedding for face recognition and clustering. In Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
pages 815–823, 2015.
[124] Jeongin Seo and Hyeyoung Park. A robust face recognition through
statistical learning of local features. In International Conference on
Neural Information Processing, pages 335–341. Springer, 2011.
[125] Jeongin Seo and Hyeyoung Park. Robust recognition of face with
partial variations using local features and statistical learning. Neurocomputing, 129:41–48, 2014.
[126] Pierre Sermanet, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Soumith Chintala, and Yann
LeCun. Pedestrian detection with unsupervised multi-stage feature
learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 3626–3633, 2013.
[127] Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman.
Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
[128] Lingxue Song, Dihong Gong, Zhifeng Li, Changsong Liu, and Wei Liu.
Occlusion robust face recognition based on mask learning with pairwise
differential siamese network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.06290, 2019.
[129] Xudong Sun, Pengcheng Wu, and Steven CH Hoi. Face detection using
deep learning: An improved faster rcnn approach. Neurocomputing,
299:42–50, 2018.
[130] Yi Sun, Yuheng Chen, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep
learning face representation by joint identification-verification. In
Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 1988–1996,
2014.
[131] Christian Szegedy, Sergey Ioffe, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Alexander A
Alemi. Inception-v4, inception-resnet and the impact of residual
connections on learning. In Thirty-first AAAI conference on artificial
intelligence, 2017.
[132] Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott Reed,
Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew
Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions. In Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages
1–9, 2015.
[133] Xiaoyang Tan, Songcan Chen, Zhi-Hua Zhou, and Jun Liu. Face
recognition under occlusions and variant expressions with partial
similarity. IEEE Transactions on information forensics and security,
4(2):217–230, 2009.

22

[134] Xiaoyang Tan, Songcan Chen, Zhi-Hua Zhou, and Fuyan Zhang.
Recognizing partially occluded, expression variant faces from single
training image per person with som and soft k-nn ensemble. IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks, 16(4):875–886, 2005.
[135] Francesc Tarrés, Antonio Rama, and L Torres. A novel method for
face recognition under partial occlusion or facial expression variations.
In Proc. 47th Intl Symp. ELMAR, pages 163–166, 2005.
[136] Daniel Sáez Trigueros, Li Meng, and Margaret Hartnett. Enhancing
convolutional neural networks for face recognition with occlusion maps
and batch triplet loss. Image and Vision Computing, 79:99–108, 2018.
[137] Daniel Sáez Trigueros, Li Meng, and Margaret Hartnett. Face recognition: From traditional to deep learning methods. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1811.00116, 2018.
[138] Matthew Turk and Alex Pentland. Eigenfaces for recognition. Journal
of cognitive neuroscience, 3(1):71–86, 1991.
[139] Dmitry Ulyanov, Andrea Vedaldi, and Victor Lempitsky. Deep image
prior. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 9446–9454, 2018.
[140] A Vijayalakshmi. Recognizing faces with partial occlusion using
inpainting. International Journal of Computer Applications, 168(13),
2017.
[141] Paul Viola and Michael Jones. Rapid object detection using a boosted
cascade of simple features. In Proceedings of the 2001 IEEE computer
society conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. CVPR
2001, volume 1, pages I–I. IEEE, 2001.
[142] Paul Viola and Michael J Jones. Robust real-time face detection.
International journal of computer vision, 57(2):137–154, 2004.
[143] Weitao Wan and Jiansheng Chen. Occlusion robust face recognition
based on mask learning. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on
Image Processing (ICIP), pages 3795–3799. IEEE, 2017.
[144] Feng Wang, Jian Cheng, Weiyang Liu, and Haijun Liu. Additive
margin softmax for face verification. IEEE Signal Processing Letters,
25(7):926–930, 2018.
[145] Hao Wang, Yitong Wang, Zheng Zhou, Xing Ji, Dihong Gong, Jingchao
Zhou, Zhifeng Li, and Wei Liu. Cosface: Large margin cosine loss for
deep face recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 5265–5274, 2018.
[146] Jianfeng Wang, Ye Yuan, and Gang Yu. Face attention network:
an effective face detector for the occluded faces. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1711.07246, 2017.
[147] Meng Wang, Zhengping Hu, Zhe Sun, Shuhuan Zhao, and Mei Sun.
Varying face occlusion detection and iterative recovery for face recognition. Journal of Electronic Imaging, 26(3):033009, 2017.
[148] Yandong Wen, Weiyang Liu, Meng Yang, Yuli Fu, Youjun Xiang,
and Rui Hu. Structured occlusion coding for robust face recognition.
Neurocomputing, 178:11–24, 2016.
[149] Yandong Wen, Kaipeng Zhang, Zhifeng Li, and Yu Qiao. A discriminative feature learning approach for deep face recognition. In European
conference on computer vision, pages 499–515. Springer, 2016.
[150] Renliang Weng, Jiwen Lu, Junlin Hu, Gao Yang, and Yap-Peng Tan.
Robust feature set matching for partial face recognition. In Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 601–
608, 2013.
[151] Renliang Weng, Jiwen Lu, and Yap-Peng Tan. Robust point set
matching for partial face recognition. IEEE transactions on image
processing, 25(3):1163–1176, 2016.
[152] Laurenz Wiskott, Norbert Krüger, N Kuiger, and Christoph Von
Der Malsburg. Face recognition by elastic bunch graph matching. IEEE
Transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 19(7):775–
779, 1997.
[153] John Wright, Allen Y Yang, Arvind Ganesh, S Shankar Sastry, and
Yi Ma. Robust face recognition via sparse representation. IEEE
transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 31(2):210–
227, 2009.
[154] Cho Ying Wu and Jian Jiun Ding. Occluded face recognition using
low-rank regression with generalized gradient direction. Pattern Recognition, 80:256–268, 2018.
[155] Shuzhe Wu, Meina Kan, Shiguang Shan, and Xilin Chen. Hierarchical
attention for part-aware face detection. International Journal of
Computer Vision, pages 1–19, 2019.
[156] Yizhang Xia, Bailing Zhang, and Frans Coenen. Face occlusion
detection based on multi-task convolution neural network. In Fuzzy
Systems and Knowledge Discovery (FSKD), 2015 12th International
Conference on, pages 375–379. IEEE, 2015.
[157] Junyuan Xie, Linli Xu, and Enhong Chen. Image denoising and inpainting with deep neural networks. In Advances in neural information
processing systems, pages 341–349, 2012.

[158] Junjie Yan, Zhen Lei, Longyin Wen, and Stan Z Li. The fastest
deformable part model for object detection. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
2497–2504, 2014.
[159] Junjie Yan, Xuzong Zhang, Zhen Lei, and Stan Z Li. Face detection
by structural models. Image and Vision Computing, 32(10):790–799,
2014.
[160] Bin Yang, Junjie Yan, Zhen Lei, and Stan Z Li. Aggregate channel
features for multi-view face detection. In IEEE international joint
conference on biometrics, pages 1–8. IEEE, 2014.
[161] Chao Yang, Xin Lu, Zhe Lin, Eli Shechtman, Oliver Wang, and Hao
Li. High-resolution image inpainting using multi-scale neural patch
synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 6721–6729, 2017.
[162] Meng Yang, Xing Wang, Guohang Zeng, and Linlin Shen. Joint and
collaborative representation with local adaptive convolution feature for
face recognition with single sample per person. Pattern recognition,
66:117–128, 2017.
[163] Meng Yang, Lei Zhang, Simon CK Shiu, and David Zhang. Gabor
feature based robust representation and classification for face recognition with gabor occlusion dictionary. Pattern Recognition, 46(7):1865–
1878, 2013.
[164] Ming-Hsuan Yang. Kernel eigenfaces vs. kernel fisherfaces: Face
recognition using kernel methods. In fgr, page 0215. IEEE, 2002.
[165] Shuo Yang, Ping Luo, Chen-Change Loy, and Xiaoou Tang. From
facial parts responses to face detection: A deep learning approach. In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision,
pages 3676–3684, 2015.
[166] Shuo Yang, Ping Luo, Chen-Change Loy, and Xiaoou Tang. Wider face:
A face detection benchmark. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 5525–5533, 2016.
[167] Shuo Yang, Ping Luo, Chen Change Loy, and Xiaoou Tang. Facenessnet: Face detection through deep facial part responses. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 40(8):1845–1859,
2018.
[168] Dong Yi, Zhen Lei, Shengcai Liao, and Stan Z Li. Learning face
representation from scratch. arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.7923, 2014.
[169] Yu-Feng Yu, Dao-Qing Dai, Chuan-Xian Ren, and Ke-Kun Huang.
Discriminative multi-scale sparse coding for single-sample face recognition with occlusion. Pattern Recognition, 66:302–312, 2017.
[170] Stefanos Zafeiriou, Cha Zhang, and Zhengyou Zhang. A survey on
face detection in the wild: past, present and future. Computer Vision
and Image Understanding, 138:1–24, 2015.
[171] Baochang Zhang, Shiguang Shan, Xilin Chen, and Wen Gao. Histogram of gabor phase patterns (hgpp): A novel object representation
approach for face recognition. IEEE Transactions on Image processing,
16(1):57–68, 2006.
[172] Cha Zhang and Zhengyou Zhang. Improving multiview face detection
with multi-task deep convolutional neural networks. In IEEE Winter
Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, pages 1036–1041.
IEEE, 2014.
[173] Guangpeng Zhang and Yunhong Wang. Faceprint: Fusion of local
features for 3d face recognition. In International Conference on
Biometrics, pages 394–403. Springer, 2009.
[174] Heng Zhang, Vishal M Patel, Mohammed Fathy, and Rama Chellappa.
Touch gesture-based active user authentication using dictionaries. In
2015 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision,
pages 207–214. IEEE, 2015.
[175] Jialiang Zhang, Xiongwei Wu, Steven CH Hoi, and Jianke Zhu. Feature
agglomeration networks for single stage face detection. Neurocomputing, 380:180–189, 2020.
[176] Kaipeng Zhang, Zhanpeng Zhang, Zhifeng Li, and Yu Qiao. Joint
face detection and alignment using multitask cascaded convolutional
networks. IEEE Signal Processing Letters, 23(10):1499–1503, 2016.
[177] Qi Zhang, Haiqing Li, Zhenan Sun, and Tieniu Tan. Deep feature fusion
for iris and periocular biometrics on mobile devices. IEEE Transactions
on Information Forensics and Security, 13(11):2897–2912, 2018.
[178] Shifeng Zhang, Longyin Wen, Xiao Bian, Zhen Lei, and Stan Z
Li. Occlusion-aware r-cnn: Detecting pedestrians in a crowd. In
Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV),
pages 637–653, 2018.
[179] Shifeng Zhang, Xiangyu Zhu, Zhen Lei, Hailin Shi, Xiaobo Wang,
and Stan Z Li. S3fd: Single shot scale-invariant face detector. In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision,
pages 192–201, 2017.
[180] Wenchao Zhang, Shiguang Shan, Xilin Chen, and Wen Gao. Local
gabor binary patterns based on kullback–leibler divergence for partially

23

occluded face recognition. IEEE signal processing letters, 14(11):875–
878, 2007.
[181] Wenchao Zhang, Shiguang Shan, Wen Gao, Xilin Chen, and Hongming
Zhang. Local gabor binary pattern histogram sequence (lgbphs): a
novel non-statistical model for face representation and recognition.
In Computer Vision, 2005. ICCV 2005. Tenth IEEE International
Conference on, volume 1, pages 786–791. IEEE, 2005.
[182] Zhishuai Zhang, Wei Shen, Siyuan Qiao, Yan Wang, Bo Wang, and
Alan Yuille. Robust face detection via learning small faces on hard
images. In The IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer
Vision, pages 1361–1370, 2020.
[183] Fang Zhao, Jiashi Feng, Jian Zhao, Wenhan Yang, and Shuicheng Yan.
Robust lstm-autoencoders for face de-occlusion in the wild. IEEE
Transactions on Image Processing, 27(2):778–790, 2018.
[184] Guoying Zhao and Matti Pietikainen. Dynamic texture recognition using local binary patterns with an application to facial expressions. IEEE
transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 29(6):915–
928, 2007.
[185] Shuhuan Zhao and Zheng-ping Hu. A modular weighted sparse
representation based on fisher discriminant and sparse residual for
face recognition with occlusion. Information Processing Letters,
115(9):677–683, 2015.
[186] Wei-Shi Zheng, Xiang Li, Tao Xiang, Shengcai Liao, Jianhuang Lai,
and Shaogang Gong. Partial person re-identification. In Proceedings of
the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 4678–
4686, 2015.
[187] Wenbo Zheng, Chao Gou, and Fei-Yue Wang. A novel approach
inspired by optic nerve characteristics for few-shot occluded face
recognition. Neurocomputing, 376:25–41, 2020.
[188] Wenming Zheng, Cairong Zou, and Li Zhao. Real-time face recognition
using gram-schmidt orthogonalization for lda. In Pattern Recognition,
2004. ICPR 2004. Proceedings of the 17th International Conference
on, volume 2, pages 403–406. IEEE, 2004.
[189] Chunluan Zhou and Junsong Yuan. Bi-box regression for pedestrian
detection and occlusion estimation. In Proceedings of the European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pages 135–151, 2018.
[190] Erjin Zhou, Zhimin Cao, and Qi Yin. Naive-deep face recognition: Touching the limit of lfw benchmark or not? arXiv preprint
arXiv:1501.04690, 2015.
[191] Zihan Zhou, Andrew Wagner, Hossein Mobahi, John Wright, and
Yi Ma. Face recognition with contiguous occlusion using markov
random fields. In 2009 IEEE 12th international conference on computer
vision, pages 1050–1057. IEEE, 2009.
[192] Xiangxin Zhu and Deva Ramanan. Face detection, pose estimation,
and landmark estimation in the wild. CVPR, 2012.
[193] Jie Zou, Qiang Ji, and George Nagy. A comparative study of local
matching approach for face recognition. IEEE Transactions on image
processing, 16(10):2617–2628, 2007.

