Received January 30, 2019, accepted February 16, 2019. Date of publication xxxx 00, 0000, date of current version xxxx 00, 0000.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2901376

Dictionary Representation of Deep Features for
Occlusion-Robust Face Recognition
FENG CEN

1 AND GUANGHUI WANG

2 , (Senior Member, IEEE)

1 Department of Control Science and Engineering, College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai 201804, China
2 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, The University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045, USA

Corresponding author: Feng Cen (feng.cen@tongji.edu.cn)
This work was supported in part by the Shanghai Agriculture Applied Technology Development Program, China, under Grant G20180306,
and in part by the China Scholarship Council.

ABSTRACT Deep learning has achieved exciting results in face recognition; however, the accuracy is
still unsatisfying for occluded faces. To improve the robustness for occluded faces, this paper proposes a
novel deep dictionary representation-based classification scheme, where a convolutional neural network is
employed as the feature extractor and followed by a dictionary to linearly code the extracted deep features.
The dictionary is composed by a gallery part consisting of the deep features of the training samples and
an auxiliary part consisting of the mapping vectors acquired from the subjects either inside or outside the
training set and associated with the occlusion patterns of the testing face samples. A squared Euclidean
norm is used to regularize the coding coefficients. The proposed scheme is computationally efficient and is
robust to large contiguous occlusion. In addition, the proposed scheme is generic for both the occluded and
non-occluded face images and works with a single training sample per subject. The extensive experimental
evaluations demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed approach over other state-of-the-art
algorithms.
INDEX TERMS Face recognition, convolutional neural network, occlusion-robust, deep learning, dictionary
representation.

I. INTRODUCTION

Face recognition (FR) is an important and challenging
research topic in computer vision and pattern recognition.
In recent years, FR has achieved great progress, benefiting from the advancement of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) based methods. Although some exciting
results that could approach human vision performance have
been reported on challenging face benchmarks [1]–[3], such
as Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW) [4] and YouTube Faces
Database (YFD) [5], there is still a long way towards achieving robust FR under challenging situations like partial occlusion and image corruption.
In the CNN-based FR framework, the CNN is generally
used as a feature extractor, followed by a classifier [1]–[3].
The state-of-the-art CNNs [6]–[9], usually involving over
tens of millions of parameters, require a vast amount of
data to mitigate overfitting, when trained from scratch (with
random initialization). To collect sufficient task specified
The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and
approving it for publication was Junchi Yan.
VOLUME 7, 2019

training face images is, however, difficult and expensive.
Thus, a popular and feasible choice in practice is directly
using a network pre-trained on large scale general purpose
face datasets (e.g., VGGFace2 [10], CASIA-WebFace [11],
and MegaFace [12]) as the off-the-shelf feature extractor for
the task of interest or as an initialization to fine-tune the
network on the face dataset specified to the application task.
Regarding the classifier, a simple classifier, such as softmax,
is usually selected due to the powerful capability of CNNs to
project the face images into a high-dimensional feature space
that is linearly separable.
The CNN-based FR schemes with the CNNs pre-trained
on large-scale face datasets are, usually, less sensitive to
facial deformation, such as illumination change, expression, and head pose variation. However, if the face is partially occluded, identification of the subject with the simple
classifier is error prone. For instance, as shown in Fig.1
(b), for the sunglasses-occluded faces of different subjects
in the AR database, the deep feature vectors lie in the
subspace oj , as distinct from the subspaces associated
with the non-occluded faces. A simple classifier is difficult

2169-3536 2019 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only.
Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1

F. Cen, G. Wang: Dictionary Representation of Deep Features

subspace (the intra-subject case) have very few and many
common activations, respectively, and for the sunglasses case,
the number of the common activations is in-between. Even
less than that in the intra-subject case, the quantity of the
common activations in the sunglasses case is sufficient to
support a subspace with loose boundaries.
On the other hand, within the subspace oj , the faces
belonging to the same subject are very close to each other,
as shown in in Fig.1 (b), since the deep feature vectors not
only describe the features of the sunglasses but also reflect
the features of the faces. This phenomenon indicates that it is
possible to employ an advanced classifier rather than a simple
classifier to identify the subject correctly for the occluded
face images.
Let v and v0 be the deep feature vectors of the occluded
face image y and non-occluded face image y0 associated
with the same subject, respectively. As shown in Fig.1 (b),
the relationship between v and v0 can be modeled by
v = v0 + ,

(1)

where  is the mapping vector from v0 to v (or the difference
vector between v and v0 ). If v0 is recovered from v,the FR
can be easily achieved.
Recovering v0 from v is quite similar to the intensively
studied problem arising from traditional FR for corrupted face
images in image space, i.e., recovering y0 from y. In the image
space, the relationship between y and y0 can be modeled
by
y = y0 + e,

FIGURE 1. Visualization of the deep feature vectors of the face images of
5 subjects randomly selected from the AR database [15]. (a) Example face
images of a subject. (b) 2-D visualization of the deep feature vectors. The
t-SNE [16] is applied to convert the high dimensional deep features into
2-D vectors for visualization convenience. (c) Visualization of the deep
feature components activated commonly for the natural faces associated
with different subjects (inter-subject), the non-occluded faces associated
with the same subject (intra-subject) and the sunglasses-occluded faces
associated with different subjects (sunglasses). The 4096-D feature vector
is reshaped to a matrix of 64 × 64 for the convenience of visualization.
The black dots represent the components activated commonly for
different faces.

to identify the subject for the deep feature vectors lying
in oj .
In fact, the subspace oj is associated with the class of sunglasses. Many research works have shown that the features
extracted by the CNNs are generic for various visual classification tasks outside the training domain [13], [14]. This
means that the CNN trained over the face images can also
effectively projects the images involving sunglasses with sufficiently large size into adjacent locations to form a subspace
in the deep feature space. By examining the images of the
faces wearing sunglasses in Fig.1(a), we can observe that the
sunglasses occupy pretty large area of the face images. From
Fig.1(c), we can observe that the deep feature vectors lying
in different subspaces (the inter-subject case) and the same
2

(2)

where e is the corruption or occlusion error. The most
prominent traditional framework to deal with this problem
is the sparse representation classification (SRC) proposed by
Wright et al. [17]. To effectively recover y0 , the SRC-based
schemes require that the error e can be shared across (or
highly correlated between) different face images and subjects. Apparently, this requirement is met in the image space
(e.g.the image variations caused by the same sunglasses for
different subjects are highly correlated). Furthermore, in the
linear feature space, the linear transformation of the image
space, such as Eigenfaces, Fisherfaces and Gabor feature
space, the conformance to this requirement is retained since
the linear transformation can be represented as a multiplication of a matrix R.1 Hence, the SRC and its improvements,
such as Extended SRC (ESRC) [18] and Superposed SRC
(SSRC) [19], can be easily applied to the linear feature space.
In contrast, the CNN-based feature extraction is, however,
a nonlinear projection from the image space to the deep
feature space, since it involves nonlinear operations, such as
ReLU and pooling. As a result, the deep feature is a kind of
holistic feature and the mapping vector  in Eq.(1) is not a
projection of e to the deep feature space, i.e.,  6= f (e), where
f (•) denotes the nonlinear projection of the CNN, but related
1 Applying R to both sides of (2) yields Ry = Ry + Re. Therefore, if e
0
is shared across different face images, then Re will also be shared.
VOLUME 7, 2019

F. Cen, G. Wang: Dictionary Representation of Deep Features

to both the physical occlusion error e and the face image y0 .
Therefore, the extension of the SRC and its improvements to
the deep feature space is not so apparent.
In this paper, we observe that for occluded face images,
the mapping vector  can be approximated by a linear combination of the mapping vectors of other face images associated
with the same occlusion pattern. Motivated by this observation, we propose a deep dictionary representation based
classification (DDRC) method to perform FR through the
recovery of v0 . Let i be the subspace associated with the
non-occluded faces of the ith subject and oj the subspace
associated with the faces occluded with the jth occlusion
pattern. Suppose that the faces are occluded with the jth
occlusion pattern. We observed that in the deep feature space,
the mapping function from the subspace i to the subspace
oj can be approximated by a linear combination of the
mapping vectors associated with the jth occlusion pattern,
i.e., the vectors drawn with blue arrows in Fig. 1 (b). Based
on this observation, we propose to use a dictionary consisting
of a gallery part and an auxiliary part to code the deep feature
vector of the testing sample. The deep feature vectors of the
training samples are used as the atoms of the gallery part. The
auxiliary part is constructed by concatenating the mapping
vectors associated with the occlusion pattern presented in the
testing samples. With this dictionary, the deep feature vector
of the occluded testing sample is coded by a squared l2 -norm
minimization to recover the deep feature vector from occlusion. The classification of the proposed DDRC is achieved
by searching for the subject having the closest deep feature
subspace to the recovered deep feature vector of the occluded
testing sample.
The research is originally motivated by cloud-based face
applications. With the development of deep neural network
accelerator chips [20], the CNN-based feature extraction will
gradually shift to the terminal or mobile end. To reduce the
bandwidth of transmission, only the deep features, rather than
the images, of the faces will be transmitted to the cloud for
further processing, such as classification and verification. The
transmission of deep features requires less bandwidth and is
much safer in terms of protection of private information than
using images. In such situation, however, we have to cope
with the occlusion in the deep feature space at the cloud end.
Therefore, instead of removing occlusion in image space,
we focus on alleviating the negative impact of occlusion on
FR in the deep feature space.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows.
1) We observe that for occluded face images, the mapping
vector  can be approximated by a linear combination
of the mapping vectors of other face images associated
with the same occlusion pattern.
2) We propose to apply the dictionary representation coding with squared l2 -norm minimization in the deep
feature space for FR. To alleviate the negative effect of
occlusion in the deep feature space, based on the above
observation, we propose a novel auxiliary dictionary,
which is generated with the mapping vectors associated
VOLUME 7, 2019

with the same occlusion pattern as the testing face
images.
3) We present extensive experiments on publicly available databases and show that the proposed DDRC is
a real-time occlusion-robust scheme and can simultaneously handle multiple complex FR challenges even
with a single training sample per subject. We also
demonstrate the significant improvement of the proposed DDRC over the state-of-the-art approaches.
4) Although end-to-end learning is desired in many applications, the proposed approach, by making optimal
use of the available CNN and the classical learning
approaches, provides a new perspective to other similar
problems.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
briefly reviews the related work. Section III describes the
proposed DDRC. Section IV shows experiments, and the
paper is concluded in Section V.
II. RELATED WORK

The defining characteristic of these approaches is the use of
the CNNs as a feature extractor. A representative system is
DeepFace, where Taigman et al. [1] derived a face representation from a nine-layer deep neural network by training
it on the largest facial dataset and reached a FR accuracy
closely approaching human-level performance on the LFW
dataset. The DeepFace work was extended by the DeepID
series of papers by Sun et al. [2], [21]–[23]. Multiple CNNs
were introduced in [2]; multi-task learning over classification
and verification was proposed in [21]; different CNNs architectures which branch a fully connected layer after each convolution layer were presented in [22] and very deep networks
are used in [23]. These series of works steadily improved the
performance on LFW dataset. Researchers from Google [3]
employed a massive dataset and a triplet-based loss to train
the CNNs. Wen et al. [24] proposed a latent factor guided
CNNs to address the age-invariant face recognition task, and
then, introduced a center loss function to help the CNNs to
learn the discriminative features for FR [25]. However, all of
these works primarily focus on the network construction and
network learning, while none of them are concerned about the
occlusion problem in FR.
The pioneer SRC FR system was proposed by
Wright et al. [17]. In their work, the occluded face image
was first coded via l1 -norm minimization as a sparse linear
combination of the expanded dictionary which consists of the
training samples and the occlusion dictionary. Then, the classification was conducted by searching for which class of
training samples could result in the minimum reconstruction
error with the sparse coding coefficients.
Following Wright et al.’s work, many researchers
worked towards improving the SRC accuracy under various
conditions. Deng et al. [18] employed an auxiliary intraclass
variant dictionary to improve the generalization ability for
undersampled FR under variable expressions, illuminations
3

F. Cen, G. Wang: Dictionary Representation of Deep Features

and disguise, and then, they proposed SSRC to learn the
prototype images as the gallery dictionary to obtain a better
gallery dictionary to deal with non-linear variations [19].
Yang and Zhang [26] and Yang et al. [27] introduced the
Gabor feature into the SRC framework to compress the occlusion dictionary and reduce the computational cost in coding
occluded face images. Ou et al. [28] proposed to learn the
occlusion dictionary from the data and incorporate a mutual
incoherence regularization term into the dictionary learning
objective function, which aims at weakening the correlation
between the occlusion dictionary and the training sample dictionary. Wang et al. [29] improved the robustness to illumination variations and occlusions by using a manifold regularized
local sparse representation model. Zhang et al. [30] proposed
a mixed norm sparse representation classification method to
exploit the correlation among the variance face images in the
query for multi-view recognition. Zhuang et al. [31] introduced a sparse illumination learning and transfer technique
to increase the robustness of FR with a single face training
sample under the condition of misalignment, illumination
variation and random corruption. Zhao et al. [32] combined
the forward and backward sparse representation together for
robust FR. Gao et al. [33] improved the performance under
the condition of the small number of labeled examples by
using a semi-supervised sparse representation-based classification approach.
However, due to the use of l1 -norm minimization, the SRC
is computationally expensive as the dictionary size grows.
Shi et al. [34] and Zhang et al. [35] independently argued
that the l1 -norm does not play a critical role in robust FR.
Based on such observations, Zhang et al. [35] put forward
to use the squared l2 -norm minimization to gain significant
advantage on the computational cost over the traditional SRC
algorithm. Cai et al. [36] introduced a probabilistic collaborative representation based classifier (ProCRC), which jointly
maximizes the likelihood that a test sample belongs to each
of the multiple classes. Liu et al. [37] employed an iterative relaxed collaborative representation model with adaptive
weights learning to enhance the resolution of face images
corrupted by noise.
Nevertheless, all of these SRC based works focus on the
image space or linear feature space and none of them address
the occlusion problem in the deep feature space.
Recently, with the rapid development of generative adversarial networks (GAN), some efforts have been made to
apply the GAN to recover occluded face image. Li et al. [38]
use a deep generative model to generate the corrupted part
of the face. The deep generative model consists of an
encoding-decoding generator and two adversarial discriminators to synthesize the missing contents from random noise.
However, this model could not well handle some unaligned
faces, and moreover, this method needs to know the occlusion
position in advance. Zhao et al. [39] introduced a robust
LSTM-autoencoders model, consisting of a multi-scale spatial LSTM encoder to produce an occlusion-robust representation of the face and a dual-channel LSTM decoder to
4

recurrently remove the occlusion in the image space. These
methods, acted as preprocessing procedures for FR, are usually complex and, depending on the problem scales, at times
require very large scale occluded training datasets.
III. THE PROPOSED DDRC
A. FEATURE EXTRACTION

In the proposed DDRC, the CNNs are first applied to extract
the face features. Suppose that the size of the input patch and
the length of the output feature vector of the CNNs are h × w
and l, respectively. The CNNs actually perform a nonlinear
mapping from the image space to the deep feature space, i.e.,
f : Rh×w 7−→ Rl .

(3)

The construction and training of the CNNs are out of the
scope of this paper. Here, we should note that in spite
of the fact that the VGG-Face networks [40] are the only
CNNs evaluated in following experiments, any CNNs well
pre-trained with numerous extra face images can be applied
to the proposed DDRC.
B. DICTIONARY REPRESENTATION

Suppose there are K subjects and the ith subject has ki training
samples. Let ui,j ∈ Rl , j = 1, 2, · · · , ki denote the deep
feature vector of the jth training sample of the ith subject
and Di = [ui,1 , ui,2 , · · · , ui,ki ] ∈ Rl×ki the matrix formed by
stacking all the ui,j ’s of the ith subject. Assume that the deep
feature vectors of the non-occluded face samples associated
with the same subject lie in a low-dimensional subspace.
If there are sufficient training samples for the ith subject,
the subspace of the ith subject can be approximated with the
linear span of Di . For a test sample y, if it belongs to the ith
subject, its deep feature vector v will be able to be represented
with a very small error as a linear combination of the column
vectors of Di .
However, the membership of the test sample is unknown
beforehand. It turns out that we need to figure out the subject
that has the best approximation of v within its subspace. By
concatenating the Di of all subjects we get a gallery
D = [D1 , D2 , . . . , DK ] ∈ Rl×k ,
(4)
PK
where k = i=1 ki . Then, the linear representation of v on
the space spanned by the entire training set can be written as
v = Dα + z,

(5)

where α = [α T1 , . . . , α Ti , . . . , α TK ]T is the coding coefficient vector and z denotes the noise term. Here, α i =
[αi,1 , . . . , αi,ki ]T ∈ Rki is the coefficient vector associated
with the ith training subject. Using only the coefficients
associated with the ith training subject, we can approximate v
of the given test sample as v̂i = Di α i . Then, we classify y by
assigning it to the subject that minimizes the residual between
v and v̂i ,
identity(y) = argmin ri (v),

(6)

i

where ri (v) = ||v − v̂i ||2 .
VOLUME 7, 2019

F. Cen, G. Wang: Dictionary Representation of Deep Features

Obviously, if the size of the gallery is greater than the feature dimension, i.e., k > l, Eq.(5) is underdetermined and the
number of possible representations is infinite. This difficulty
can be resolved by imposing a regularization constraint to α,
and then, the solution is given by
α̂ = argmin{||v − Dα||22 + λg(α)},
α

(7)

where λ is a positive regularization parameter and g(α) is the
regularization function.
Conventionally, l1 -norm, g(·) = || · ||1 , and squared
l2 -norm, g(·) = || · ||22 , are two frequently used regularization functions. The l1 -norm minimization leads to a sparse
solution and is robust to the outlier [41]. However, it is computationally expensive, even with fast implementation, such
as the interior-point method [42] and the dual augmented
Lagrangian method (DALM) [43]. The squared l2 -norm minimization has the advantage of lower computational cost and
it can achieve competitive classification accuracy compared
with the l1 -norm for FR in the image space or the linear
feature space [27], [35]. When the squared l2 -norm minimization is used, the solution of Eq.(7) can be analytically
derived as

−1
α̂ = DT D + λI
DT v .
(8)
−1 T
Let P = DT D + λI
D . Clearly, P is independent of v
and can be calculated in advance. Consequently, the computational complexity will only be proportional to the number
of rows of P for a given deep feature space. This means that
the squared l2 -norm minimization has a complexity of O(n).
The linear computational complexity is a preferred property
for realistic FR applications. Hence, we adopt the squared l2 norm in the proposed DDRC. In addition, as recommended
in [35] and verified by us, the l2 -norm ‘‘sparsity’’ ||α i ||2 can
also bring some discrimination information for classification.
Therefore, we use ||α i ||2 to normalize the residual ri (v) in
Eq.(6).
C. OCCLUSION

In this section, we extend the above proposed DDRC to deal
with occlusion. Suppose the occluded test sample y belongs
to the ith subject. If the impaction of the occlusion on the
deep feature v is small, i.e., the magnitude of  in Eq. (1) is
small, we can treat v approximately as if it stays in i . On
the contrary, if v is heavily affected by the occlusion, i.e., the
magnitude of  is large, v will move out of i .
For the latter case, we assume that the deep feature vectors
of the face images associated with the same occlusion pattern
lie in the same deep feature subspace denoted by oj . Here,
the subscript j is the index of the occlusion pattern. The
subspace associated with the sunglasses occlusion pattern
in Fig. 1 is an example to show the rationality of such assumption (see the explanation in section I).
The occlusion can be regarded as a mapping from the subspace  of non-occluded faces to the subspace oj . Suppose
VOLUME 7, 2019

FIGURE 2. Illustration of the coding coefficients for a non-occluded face
sample (top) and an occluded face sample (bottom). The VGG-Face
network is employed as the deep feature extractor. Instead of the feature
vectors, the corresponding face images are presented for easy
understanding. For the occluded face sample, some atoms of the auxiliary
part have quite large coefficients even comparable to the coefficients
associated with the correct subject in the gallery part. This indicates that
the linear combination of auxiliary atoms effectively represents the
mapping vector introduced by the occlusion.

that the mapping is bijective, then, the relationship between
v0 and v can be written as
v = v0 + Φj (v0 ),

(9)

where Φj (·) is a function related to the mapping of the jth
occlusion pattern.
Let  j,i ∈ Rl be the ith mapping vector associated with the
jth occlusion pattern. Actually,  j,i is the difference between
the feature vectors of the non-occluded and the occluded faces
associated with the same subject. We observe that Φj (·) can be
approximately modeled by a linear combination of sufficient
mapping vectors associated with the jth occlusion pattern,
i.e.,
Φj (v0 ) ≈ Doj β j ,

(10)

where Doj = [ j,1 , . . . ,  j,qj
tionary associated with the jth occlusion pattern, which is
formed by stacking all the training mapping vectors, qj is the
number of training mapping vectors, and β j ∈ Rqj the coding
coefficient vector. An example to illustrate the observation is
shown in Fig. 2. We further assume that the approximation of
Eq. (10) is held generically for occluded face images.
Suppose there are Q types of occlusion patterns. Since
the occlusion pattern of the test sample is unknown at the
beginning, we concatenate the auxiliary dictionaries of Q
] ∈ Rl×qj is the auxiliary dic-

5

F. Cen, G. Wang: Dictionary Representation of Deep Features

occlusion patterns to form the auxiliary dictionary for the
proposed DDRC, i.e.,
Do = [Do1 , Do2 , . . . , DoQ ] ∈ Rl×ko ,
(11)
PQ
where ko = j=1 qj . Then, Φj (v0 ) can be coded as Φj (v0 ) ≈
Do β with β = [β 1 , β 2 , . . . , β Q ] ∈ Rko . Considering Eq. (5)
the dictionary representation of the feature vector of the
non-occluded face, we can model v by
v = Da ω + z,

(12)

where Da = [D, Do ], and ω = [α T , β T ]T
Generally speaking, Da is overcomplete and some kind of
regularization restriction must be imposed on ω to obtain the
unique solution. As discussed in section III-B, the squared
l2 -norm is a proper trade-off between the accuracy and the
computational cost. By using the squared l2 -norm minimization, similar to Eq.(8), ω can be analytically estimated by

Algorithm 1 The DDRC Algorithm
1) For each training and testing sample, the CNN is used
to extract the features.
2) Construct the dictionary Da with the deep features from
the training samples.
3) Employ PCA to reduce the number of rows of Da to m
and project the deep feature v of the test sample onto
the m-dimension space.
4) Normalize the columns of Da to have unit l2 -norm.
5) For each test sample y:
a) Normalize v to have unit l2 -norm.
b) According to Eq.(12), code v over Da by
−1 T
ω̂ = DTa Da + λI
Da v.
c) Compute the residuals with respect to each training subject by using
o β̂k2
.
ri (v) = kv−Dki α̂α̂i −D
i k2
d) Output the identity of y as
identity(y) = arg mini {ri (v)}.

ω̂ = Pa v,

(13)

−1 T
where ω̂ = [α̂ T , β̂ ] and Pa = DTa Da + λI
Da .
After obtaining the estimated coding coefficients ω̂, we can
approximately recover the deep feature vector in the subspace
 for the occluded face as
T T

v0 = v − Do β̂

(14)

Then, the classification is done by comparing the similarity
of v0 to the feature subspace of the non-occluded faces associated with each subject. This can be achieved by replacing
the v in Eq. (6) with the v0 in Eq.(14).
In many situations, if we cannot collect sufficient training
samples and mapping vectors, Eq. (13) might lead to an
overfitting solution. To avoid such problem, we first use the
principal component analysis (PCA) to reduce the dimensionality of Da from l × (k + ko ) to m × (k + ko ), where m < l.
Accordingly, the deep feature v of the test sample should be
first projected onto this m-dimension space.
The implementation details of the proposed DDRC algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 1.
To illustrate the working principle of the proposed DDRC,
Fig. 2 shows the coding coefficients for a non-occluded face
sample and an occluded face sample.
D. GENERATION OF AUXILIARY DICTIONARY

In the proposed DDRC approach, we only assume that Φj (v0 )
is related to the occlusion pattern. This assumption implies
that it is unnecessary to associate the atoms of Do with the
training subjects in the gallery part. Therefore, the auxiliary
dictionary can be generated with the subjects from either
inside or outside the training set.
In general,  j,i can be obtained in various ways as long as
they can reflect the mapping from  to oj . For instance,
let xoj,i be the occluded face sample associated with the jth
occlusion pattern, and xi the non-occluded counterpart of xoj,i
associated with the same subject, which is acquired under the
6

same or similar facial expression, head pose, and environment
condition as xoj,i . Then,  j,i can be calculated by
 j,i = uoj,i − ui ,

(15)

where uoj,i is the deep feature vector of xoj,i and ui the deep
feature vector of xi . This method is named pair-matching.
However, in many situations, the non-occluded counterpart may not be collected. Instead, we can use a ’natural’
face image of the same subject as an alternative to xi . We
name this method natural-matching. The  j,i generated with
the natural-matching method may contain some information
related to other kinds of variations, such as illumination
changes and facial expressions. This irrelevant information,
as shown in section IV-A1, may undermine the ability of the
auxiliary dictionary to represent the occlusion mapping and
eventually degrade the classification accuracy.
IV. EXPERIMENTS

In this section, we present experiments on publicly available
databases to demonstrate the performance of the proposed
DDRC. In the experiments, the VGG-Face network with
configuration A [40] is adopted as the deep feature extractor
for the proposed DDRC, because it has a publicly available pre-trained model and a demonstrated face verification
accuracy close to human vision on the LFW dataset. The
VGG-Face network consists of 16 convolutional layers, 5
max-pooling layers, and 3 fully-connected layers. It takes
color image patch of size 224 × 224 as the input. To satisfy
the input requirement of the VGG-Face network, the face
images are first resized to 224×224, and the grayscale images
are transformed to three-channel pseudo-color images. The
deep feature vector, which has a dimension of 4096, is taken
from the second last fully-connected hidden layer neuron
activations of the VGG-Face network. The implementation
of VGG-Face network used in the experiments is based on
VOLUME 7, 2019

F. Cen, G. Wang: Dictionary Representation of Deep Features

the MatConvNet [44]. The experiments were conducted on a
computer with an Intel i7 CPU and without GPU acceleration.
A. EVALUATION ON AR DATABASE

As adopted in [17], a subset face crops of the AR
database [15], [45] that contains 50 male and 50 female subjects are used for evaluation. For each subject, 26 images are
recorded in two different sessions separated by two weeks.
Each session consists of 13 images with different facial variations, including illumination changes, expressions, and facial
disguises, as shown in Fig. 1.
1) PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

In this experiment, we divided the 100 subjects into two
subsets, a testing subset consisting of 50 subjects randomly
selected for testing and an occlusion subset consisting of the
remaining 50 subjects (no overlapping with the testing subset)
for generating the auxiliary dictionary. For each subject in the
testing subset, the seven non-occluded images with illumination changes and expressions from session 1 were used as
training samples, and the other images from session 1 and all
the images from session 2 were used for testing.
In accordance to the experiment setting in [27], the original 165 × 120 color images were converted to 83 × 60
gray scale images. Four algorithms were considered for
comparison in the experiment: VGG-Face network followed
by a softmax classifier (VGG+softmax) [40], sparse representation based classification (SRC) [41], Gabor feature
based sparse representation based classification with l1 norm
regularization (GRRC_l1 ) [27], and the proposed DDRC.
The VGG+softmax method can be regarded as the original VGG-Face network with the last two layers (the last
fully-connected layer and softmax prob layer) fine-tuned on
the task-specified dataset.
Before comparing different algorithms, we first studied
the impact of parameter selection on the performance of the
proposed DDRC. The experiments were conducted on the
face images disguised with sunglasses from session 1.
The result is shown in Fig. 3, where the auxiliary dictionary
generated by using all 50 subjects with pair-matching method
includes both sunglasses and scarf occlusion patterns. From
Fig. 3, we can observe that a wide range of λ results in
quite close FR accuracy. This observation indicates that the
proposed DDRC is less sensitive to the variation of λ. We can
also learn that the excessive reduction of the feature vector
dimension by using PCA can dramatically increase the FR
error rate, e.g.around 20% loss in FR rate for the case of 50
comparing to the other cases. This can be attributed to the
loss of important discriminative information for the excessive
reduction.
In Fig.4, four types of auxiliary dictionaries were
studied: pair-matching with sunglasses and scarf occlusion patterns (pair sunglasses+scarf), pair-matching with
sunglasses occlusion pattern (pair sunglasses), naturalmatching with sunglasses and scarf occlusion patterns (natural sunglasses+scarf), and natural-matching with sunglasses
VOLUME 7, 2019

FIGURE 3. Recognition rate of DDRC with respect to λ for various feature
dimension reductions with PCA for the sunglasses from session 1 on a
subset of the AR database.

FIGURE 4. Recognition rates of the proposed DDRC for the sunglasses
from session 1 on a subset of the AR database versus the number of
subjects in the occlusion dictionary for different generation methods of
the occlusion dictionary.

occlusion pattern (natural sunglasses). For each subject in the
occlusion subset, there are 6 mapping vectors associated with
the sunglasses occlusion pattern and 6 mapping vectors associated with the scarf occlusion pattern. Therefore, the number
of atoms in an auxiliary dictionary is proportional to the
number of subjects in the auxiliary. For instance, if the auxiliary dictionary involving both sunglasses and scarf occlusion
patterns is generated by using 10 subjects, it will contain 120
atoms. The experiments were conducted with the parameters
m = 250 and λ = 0.05.
From Fig. 4, we can see that the more subjects that are used
to generate the auxiliary dictionary, the higher the recognition
rate that can be achieved. Furthermore, we can observe that
the scarf occlusion pattern, if it is included in the auxiliary
dictionary, can slightly improve the FR accuracy for the face
images occluded with sunglasses. That may be because some
responses in the deep feature space are shared by these two
7

F. Cen, G. Wang: Dictionary Representation of Deep Features

TABLE 1. Recognition rates(%) on the AR database with disguise.

occlusion patterns and the more information related to the
occlusion pattern the auxiliary dictionary involves, the better
representation of the occlusion pattern the auxiliary dictionary can achieve. On the contrary, if the information unrelated to the occlusion is involved in the auxiliary dictionary,
the representation ability of the auxiliary dictionary can be
hurt. For instance, the natural-matching method, which introduces more information about the illumination change, facial
expressions etc. into the auxiliary dictionary, shows worse
performance than the corresponding pair-matching method.
Therefore, in the following experiments on the AR database,
the pair-matching method is used to generate the auxiliary
dictionary and both sunglasses and scarf occlusion patterns
are included in the auxiliary dictionary.
The performance comparison of different algorithms is
presented in Table 1. For the proposed DDRC, the auxiliary
dictionary, consisting of 600 atoms, was generated with all
50 subjects in the occlusion subset and m and λ were set
to 250 and 0.05, respectively. For the GRRC_l1 , the source
codes were provided by the authors and the default setting for
the AR database was used. For the SRC, we implement the
error constrained model with the same error tolerance as in
their original paper [41], i.e.,  = 0.05. To better understand
the performance improvement of the proposed DDRC with
respect to facial variations, we separately list the FR rate
results for sunglasses disguise in session 1, sunglasses disguise in session 2, scarf disguise in session 1, scarf disguise
in session2, and non-occlusion case in session 2.
In Table 1, it is evident that the proposed DDRC achieves
the highest FR rates in all five testing scenarios. In comparison with the VGG+softmax method for the ‘‘Sunglasses’’
scenarios, the proposed DDRC has at least 19.3% increase in
FR rate. We can also find that the VGG+softmax achieves
the second highest recognition rates (98% and 96%) for the
two cases of scarf occlusion. The reason might be that the
discriminative features captured by the VGG-Face network
are less related to the jaw and mouth than the other parts
of the face. We should note that even for such high FR
rates, the proposed DDRC can effectively increase the FR
accuracy as well. These results demonstrate that the proposed
DDRC can effectively handle the occlusion and significantly
improve the FR accuracy of the original network under the
occlusion scenarios.
In addition, we can observe that the same perfect FR
rates on the non-occlusion testing subset from session 2 are
achieved by both the DDRC and VGG+softmax. This is
8

TABLE 2. Single-sample FR rates(%) on the AR database.

because the dictionary representation classifier can effectively discriminate the linear subspace in deep feature space.
This result shows that the proposed DDRC is a generic
approach for both occlusion and non-occlusion scenarios.
2) SINGLE-SAMPLE FR

There is a situation frequently confronted in practical applications that only one training sample per subject can be provided, such as recognizing individuals based on their ID card
photos. To address this problem, we evaluated the robustness
of the DDRC with one training sample per subject in this
section.
In order to make a fair comparison, we adopted the experiment setting in [18], i.e., the testing subset consists of 80
randomly selected subjects from the AR database, the occlusion subset consists of the remaining 20 subjects, the natural image for each subject from session 1 was used as the
training sample, and the other 12 images for each subject
from session 1 were selected for testing. The pair-matching
method with all the 20 subjects in the occlusion subset is
used to generate the occlusion dictionary for the DDRC. Both
sunglasses and scarf occlusion patterns were included in the
auxiliary dictionary such that the auxiliary dictionary has the
same number of atoms as that in [18], i.e., 240 atoms. The
feature dimension m and the regularization parameter λ were
set to 320 and 0.35 for the proposed DDRC, respectively. The
proposed DDRC with a single training sample per subject is
named as DDRC_SS in the following experiments. In Table 2,
the results of the SRC and ESRC are reported from the
original paper [18]. Except for the SRC and ESRC, all other
methods listed in Table 2 adopt the same converted images as
in section IV-A1.
From Table 2, we can observe that, even with insufficient
occlusion samples, DDRC_SS achieves the best FR accuracy
(over 90%) in all the testing scenarios. For the scenarios
with occlusion (‘‘Disguise’’ and ‘‘Disguise+Illumination’’),
at least 10% increase in FR rate is achieved when compared to all the other methods. In comparison with the
VGG+softmax method, the proposed DDRC achieves 14%
and 20.6% increase in FR rate for the ‘‘Disguise’’ and
‘‘Disguise+Illumination’’ scenarios, respectively.
The VGG+softmax and the proposed DDRC both have
nearly perfect FR accuracy for the testing scenarios of
‘‘expression’’ and ‘‘illumination’’. This indicates that the
VGG-Face deep feature space is more discriminative than the
VOLUME 7, 2019

F. Cen, G. Wang: Dictionary Representation of Deep Features

TABLE 3. Recognition rates(%) on the FERET database with block
occlusion.

FIGURE 5. Examples of a subject of the pose subset of the FERET
database (top row) and block occlusion with block size of 43 × 43 on the
center of each sample (bottom row).

image space. Because of this property, it is unnecessary for
the DDRC to handle the facial variation that is not a result
of the occlusion or corruption. Consequently, less work is
needed by the DDRC_SS to generate the auxiliary dictionary
than by the ESRC, because only the occlusion images need
to be collected. The results again demonstrate that the proposed DDRC is a generic approach for both occlusion and
non-occlusion scenarios.
B. EVALUATION ON FERET POSE DATABASE

In addition to illumination change and expressions, another
situation frequently encountered in real face images is the
head pose variation. To evaluate the performance on head
pose variation, the pose subset of the FERET database [46]
was selected, which includes 194 subjects (about 7 images
each). This subset is composed of the images marked with
’ba’,’bd’,’be’,’bf’,’bg’,’bj’, and ’bk’ for natural, pose variations of +25◦ , +15◦ , −15◦ , and −25◦ , expression and illumination, respectively. These images were cropped to the
size of 80 × 80. Some example images of a subject are
shown in Fig.5. Since the original pose subset of the FERET
database does not have the variation caused by occlusion,
we simulated the block occlusion by replacing a square block
centered on each resized original image with an unrelated
image. Four different sizes of the block occlusion were considered in the simulation, 25×25, 35×35, 43×43, and 50×50
corresponding to occlusion ratios of 9.7%, 19.1%, 28.9% and
39.1%, respectively. The block occlusion examples with the
block size of 43 × 43 are shown in Fig.5.
In the experiments, 150 subjects randomly drawn from
all 194 subjects were used for testing and constructing the
gallery, and the other 44 subjects were used to generate the
auxiliary dictionary for the proposed methods. The performance on different ratios of block occlusion are tested separately and the results are listed in Table 3. The ’ba’, ’bk’ and
’bj’ images of each subject from the original non-occlusion
subset are chosen as the training samples (except for the
DDRC_SS, which only employs the ’ba’ image as the training
sample). The GRRC_l1 used the same setting as in [27]. The
parameters of the proposed DDRC and DDRC_SS are set to
m = 600 and λ = 0.5. The auxiliary dictionary is generated
with the pair-matching method from the 44 subjects.
The evaluation results are listed in Table 3, from which
we can see that, for the occlusion ratio less than around
30%, the proposed DDRC and DDRC_SS achieves the best
performance in FR rate. Even with the block occlusion of
VOLUME 7, 2019

28.9%, the proposed DDRC can reach an FR rate close to
90%. However, for the extremely large size of occlusion,
e.g.50 × 50, the occlusion cannot be recovered effectively by
the proposed DDRC and the FR rate dropped dramatically.
We can also note that for the block occlusion of small size,
e.g.25 × 25, the VGG+softmax achieves similar high FR
rate to the proposed DDRC. This indicates that the block
occlusion of small size may not map the deep feature vector
out of the subspace associated with non-occlusion faces of the
subject. The recognition performance on the non-occlusion
images is also evaluated for the proposed DDRC and a 100%
accuracy was observed. So we do not list the result in Table 5.
C. EVALUATION ON CelebA DATABASE

This experiment is designed to evaluate the performance of
the proposed DDRC on a large-scale database. The CelebA
database [47] is adopted in the experiment, since it is a
large-scale face database containing large variations of pose,
expression, and illumination etc. Because the training dataset
of CelebA is originally used to train the CNNs, we only use
the test dataset and part of the validation dataset of CelebA
for evaluation. In the experiment, due to few occluded faces
in the original CelebA dataset, the synthesized occluded faces
are used for evaluation.
The test dataset of CelebA consists of 1, 000 subjects with
19, 963 images. We partitioned the test dataset of CelebA
near equally into two parts with randomly drawn method:
the training set and testing set. Each part consists of around
10, 000 images. Since three subjects have only 1 image each,
we put them into the training set to make sure that each
identity has at least one training sample. In total, the training
set and testing set cover 1, 000 and 997 subjects, respectively.
The training set is used to build the gallery dictionary and the
testing set is employed to synthesize the occluded test face
images. From the validation dataset of CelebA, we randomly
selected 20 identities each with randomly drawn 20 images
to construct the auxiliary dictionary. Two occlusion patches
shown in Fig.6 are used to contaminate the face images on
the center.
Only the VGG+softmax and proposed DDRC were evaluated, because the methods based on the image space or
linear transform of image space and single-sample based
method do not suit to handle a large-scale dataset with large
variation. In the experiment, we crop the face in each image
9

F. Cen, G. Wang: Dictionary Representation of Deep Features

has a computational complexity less than O(2n). Therefore,
the proposed DDRC is a computationally efficient approach
and suitable for real-time large-scale applications.
In the above experiments, for the largest size of Pa , i.e., the
Pa used for the proposed DDRC method in section IV-C,
the computational time of the 5-th step of Algorithm 1 is
around 16ms per test image and is irrelevant to the test image.
V. CONCLUSION
FIGURE 6. Occlusion patches and example with images various occlusion
ratios for the test dataset of the CelebA database.
TABLE 4. Recognition rates(%) on the test dataset of CelebA database
with block occlusion.

with the size of 128 × 128 first and for the occluded face
image, the occlusion patch is superimposed at the center
of the face image. Four occlusion ratios were tested, 0%
(non-occlusion), 4.98%, 10%, and 14.7%. The examples of
occluded face crops with various occlusion ratios are shown
in Fig.6.
For the proposed DDRC, the gallery dictionary is constructed with all the face images of the training set. The
auxiliary dictionary includes all 4 occlusion ratios and are
constructed with the pair-matching. The parameters of the
proposed DDRC are set as m = 1000 and λ = 0.05. For
the VGG+softmax, the softmax classifier is trained using the
training set.
The experimental results are listed in Table 4. From the
results, we can observe that the proposed DDRC significantly
improves the FR rate for the occluded face images (13.3%
increase in FR rate for 14.7% occlusion). We also note that the
proposed DDRC is slightly worse than the VGG+softmax for
the non-occlusion case. We reevaluate the proposed DDRC
without PCA for the non-occlusion case and observe that
the FR rate reaches 92.3%. Therefore, the slightly low FR
rate at non-occlusion case is caused by the PCA dimension
reduction.
D. COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY

The computational cost of the proposed DDRC mainly lies in
the calculation of the deep features. The maximum time cost
for the feature extraction is less than 0.4 seconds per image.
The step 5b of Algorithm 1 has a computational complexity
of O(n) with respect to the number of the rows of Pa (see
the analysis in section III-B). The step 5c of Algorithm 1 is
proportional to the number of the columns of D for a given
deep feature space. Since the number of the rows of Pa is
larger than the number of the columns of D, given the dimensionality of the deep feature, the 5-th step of Algorithm 1
10

In this paper, we have proposed an effective method to
alleviate the occlusion effect in deep feature space for FR.
The proposed DDRC is generic to the FR of both occluded
and non-occluded face images. In addition, the experiments
show that the proposed DDRC can well handle the FR with
a single training sample per subject for simple application
scenarios. From the computational complexity analysis and
the experiments, we demonstrate that the proposed DDRC is
a promising real-time algorithm for practical FR applications.
The weakness of the proposed method lies in the assumption that the occlusion pattern of the testing face is included in
the auxiliary dictionary. However, in many face recognition
applications, the major types of the occlusion patterns are
limited. As a result, the proposed method can effectively
boost the performance of the FR in practical applications. In
the future, we will improve the design of the auxiliary dictionary to handle the occlusion patterns outside the auxiliary
dictionary.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Taigman, M. Yang, M. A. Ranzato, and L. Wolf, ‘‘DeepFace: Closing
the gap to human-level performance in face verification,’’ in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2014, pp. 1701–1708.
[2] Y. Sun, X. Wang, and X. Tang, ‘‘Deep learning face representation from
predicting 10,000 classes,’’ in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., Jun. 2014, pp. 1891–1898.
[3] F. Schroff, D. Kalenichenko, and J. Philbin, ‘‘FaceNet: A unified embedding for face recognition and clustering,’’ in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2015, pp. 815–823.
[4] G. B. Huang, M. Mattar, T. Berg, and E. Learned-Miller, ‘‘Labeled faces
in the wild: A database forstudying face recognition in unconstrained environments,’’ Dept. Comput. Sci., Univ. Massachusetts, Amherst, Amherst,
MA, USA, Tech. Rep. 07-49, 2007.
[5] L. Wolf, T. Hassner, and I. Maoz, ‘‘Face recognition in unconstrained
videos with matched background similarity,’’ in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2011, pp. 529–534.
[6] C. Szegedy et al., ‘‘Going deeper with convolutions,’’ in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2015, pp. 1–9.
[7] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, ‘‘Deep residual learning for
image recognition,’’ in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[8] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman. (2014). ‘‘Very deep convolutional
networks for large-scale image recognition.’’ [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556
[9] K. Zhang, M. Sun, X. Han, X. Yuan, L. Guo, and T. Liu, ‘‘Residual
networks of residual networks: Multilevel residual networks,’’ IEEE Trans.
Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 1303–1314, Jun. 2018.
[10] Q. Cao, L. Shen, W. Xie, O. M. Parkhi, and A. Zisserman. (2017).
‘‘VGGFace2: A dataset for recognising faces across pose and age.’’
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.08092
[11] D. Yi, Z. Lei, S. Liao, and S. Z. Li. (2014). ‘‘Learning face representation
from scratch.’’ [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1411.7923
[12] A. Nech and I. Kemelmacher-Shlizerman, ‘‘Level playing field for million
scale face recognition,’’ in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jul. 2017, pp. 7044–7053.
VOLUME 7, 2019

F. Cen, G. Wang: Dictionary Representation of Deep Features

[13] A. S. Razavian, H. Azizpour, J. Sullivan, and S. Carlsson, ‘‘CNN features
off-the-shelf: An astounding baseline for recognition,’’ in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops, Jun. 2014, pp. 806–813.
[14] B. Zhou, A. Lapedriza, A. Khosla, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba, ‘‘Places: A 10
million image database for scene recognition,’’ IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell., vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 1452–1464, Jun. 2018.
[15] A. M. Martinez, ‘‘The AR face database,’’ CVC, New Delhi, India,
Tech. Rep. #24, 1998.
[16] L. van der Maaten and G. Hinton, ‘‘Visualizing data using t-SNE,’’ J. Mach.
Learn. Res., vol. 9, pp. 2579–2605, Nov. 2008.
[17] J. Wright, A. Y. Yang, A. Ganesh, S. S. Sastry, and Y. Ma, ‘‘Robust face
recognition via sparse representation,’’ IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell., vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 210–227, Feb. 2009.
[18] W. Deng, J. Hu, and J. Guo, ‘‘Extended SRC: Undersampled face recognition via intraclass variant dictionary,’’ IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell., vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 1864–1870, Sep. 2012.
[19] W. Deng, J. Hu, and J. Guo, ‘‘In defense of sparsity based face recognition,’’ in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2013,
pp. 399–406.
[20] Y.-H. Chen, T. Krishna, J. S. Emer, and V. Sze, ‘‘Eyeriss: An
energy-efficient reconfigurable accelerator for deep convolutional neural
networks,’’ in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC) Dig. Tech.
Papers, Jan./Feb. 2016, pp. 262–263.
[21] Y. Sun, Y. Chen, X. Wang, and X. Tang, ‘‘Deep learning face representation
by joint identification-verification,’’ in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst., 2014, pp. 1988–1996.
[22] Y. Sun, X. Wang, and X. Tang, ‘‘Deeply learned face representations are
sparse, selective, and robust,’’ in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., Jun. 2015, pp. 2892–2900.
[23] Y. Sun, D. Liang, X. Wang, and X. Tang. (2015). ‘‘DeepID3: Face recognition with very deep neural networks.’’ [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1502.00873
[24] Y. Wen, Z. Li, and Y. Qiao, ‘‘Latent factor guided convolutional neural
networks for age-invariant face recognition,’’ in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2016, pp. 4893–4901.
[25] Y. Wen, K. Zhang, Z. Li, and Y. Qiao, ‘‘A discriminative feature learning
approach for deep face recognition,’’ in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.
Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2016, pp. 499–515.
[26] M. Yang and L. Zhang, ‘‘Gabor feature based sparse representation for face
recognition with Gabor occlusion dictionary,’’ in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput.
Vis. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2010, pp. 448–461.
[27] M. Yang, L. Zhang, S. C. K. Shiu, and D. Zhang, ‘‘Gabor feature based
robust representation and classification for face recognition with Gabor
occlusion dictionary,’’ Pattern Recognit., vol. 46, no. 7, pp. 1865–1878,
Jul. 2013.
[28] W. Ou, X. You, D. Tao, P. Zhang, Y. Tang, and Z. Zhu, ‘‘Robust face
recognition via occlusion dictionary learning,’’ Pattern Recognit., vol. 47,
no. 4, pp. 1559–1572, Apr. 2014.
[29] L. Wang, H. Wu, and C. Pan, ‘‘Manifold regularized local sparse representation for face recognition,’’ IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol.,
vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 651–659, Apr. 2015.
[30] X. Zhang, D.-S. Pham, S. Venkatesh, W. Liu, and D. Phung, ‘‘Mixed-norm
sparse representation for multi view face recognition,’’ Pattern Recognit.,
vol. 48, no. 9, pp. 2935–2946, Sep. 2015.
[31] L. Zhuang, T.-H. Chan, A. Y. Yang, S. S. Sastry, and Y. Ma, ‘‘Sparse
illumination learning and transfer for single-sample face recognition with
image corruption and misalignment,’’ Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 114, no. 2,
pp. 272–287, 2014.
[32] Z.-Q. Zhao, Y.-M. Cheung, H. Hu, and X. Wu, ‘‘Corrupted and occluded
face recognition via cooperative sparse representation,’’ Pattern Recognit.,
vol. 56, pp. 77–87, Aug. 2016.
[33] Y. Gao, J. Ma, and A. L. Yuille, ‘‘Semi-supervised sparse representation
based classification for face recognition with insufficient labeled samples,’’
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 2545–2560, May 2017.
[34] Q. Shi, A. Eriksson, A. van den Hengel, and C. Shen, ‘‘Is face recognition
really a compressive sensing problem?’’ in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2011, pp. 553–560.
[35] L. Zhang, M. Yang, and X. Feng, ‘‘Sparse representation or collaborative
representation: Which helps face recognition?’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis., Nov. 2011, pp. 471–478.

VOLUME 7, 2019

[36] S. Cai, L. Zhang, W. Zuo, and X. Feng, ‘‘A probabilistic collaborative
representation based approach for pattern classification,’’ in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2016, pp. 2950–2959.
[37] L. Liu, S. Li, and C. L. P. Chen, ‘‘Iterative relaxed collaborative
representation with adaptive weights learning for noise robust face
hallucination,’’ IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., to be published. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/
8345667. doi: 10.1109/TCSVT.2018.2829758.
[38] Y. Li, S. Liu, J. Yang, and M.-H. Yang, ‘‘Generative face completion,’’ in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jul. 2017,
pp. 3911–3919.
[39] F. Zhao, J. Feng, J. Zhao, W. Yang, and S. Yan, ‘‘Robust
LSTM-autoencoders for face de-occlusion in the wild,’’ IEEE Trans.
Image Process., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 778–790, Feb. 2018.
[40] O. M. Parkhi, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman, ‘‘Deep face recognition,’’ in
Proc. Brit. Mach. Vis. Conf., 2015, vol. 1. no. 3, p. 6.
[41] J. Wright, A. Ganesh, A. Yang, Z. Zhou, and Y. Ma. (2011). ‘‘Sparsity
and robustness in face recognition.’’ [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1111.1014
[42] S.-J. Kim, K. Koh, M. Lustig, S. Boyd, and D. Gorinevsky, ‘‘An
interior-point method for large-scale `1 -regularized least squares,’’ IEEE
J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 606–617, Dec. 2007.
[43] A. Y. Yang, Z. Zhou, A. G. Balasubramanian, S. S. Sastry, and Y. Ma, ‘‘Fast
`1 -minimization algorithms for robust face recognition,’’ IEEE Trans.
Image Process., vol. 22, no. 8, pp. 3234–3246, Aug. 2013.
[44] A. Vedaldi and K. Lenc, ‘‘MatConvNet: Convolutional neural networks for
MATLAB,’’ in Proc. 23rd ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, 2015, pp. 689–692.
[45] A. M. Martínez and A. C. Kak, ‘‘PCA versus LDA,’’ IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 228–233, Feb. 2001.
[46] P. J. Phillips, H. Wechsler, J. Huang, and P. J. Rauss, ‘‘The FERET database
and evaluation procedure for face-recognition algorithms,’’ Image Vis.
Comput., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 295–306, 1998.
[47] Z. Liu, P. Luo, X. Wang, and X. Tang, ‘‘Deep learning face attributes in the
wild,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Dec. 2015, pp. 3730–3738.

FENG CEN received the Ph.D. degree in computer
application technology from Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China, in 2003.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
Department of Control Science and Engineering,
Tongji University, Shanghai. His research interests
include computer vision, image processing, and
pattern recognition.

GUANGHUI WANG (M’10–SM’17) was a
Research Fellow and a Visiting Scholar with
the Department of Electronic Engineering, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, from 2003 to
2005. From 2006 to 2010, he was a Research
Fellow with the Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, University of Windsor,
Canada. He is currently an Assistant Professor
with The University of Kansas, USA. He has
authored one book, Guide to Three Dimensional
Structure and Motion Factorization (Springer-Verlag). He has published
over 100 papers in peer-reviewed journals and conferences. His research
interests include computer vision, structure from motion, object detection
and tracking, machine learning, and robot localization and navigation.
Dr. Wang has served as an Associate Editor and on the Editorial Board of
two journals, as an Area Chair or TPC member for over 20 conferences, and
as a Reviewer for over 20 journals.

11

