IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMETRICS, BEHAVIOR, AND IDENTITY SCIENCE, VOL. 2, NO. 3, JULY 2020

223

D2SC-GAN: Dual Deep-Shallow Channeled
Generative Adversarial Network, for Resolving
Low-Resolution Faces for Recognition
in Classroom Scenarios
Avishek Bhattacharjee

and Sukhendu Das , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Face Recognition using convolutional neural
networks have achieved considerable success in constrained
environments in the recent past. However, the performance of
these methods deteriorates in case of mismatch of training and
test distributions, under classroom/surveillance scenarios. These
test (probe) samples suffer from degradations such as noise,
poor illumination, pose variations, occlusion, low-resolution
(LR), blur as well as aliasing, when compared to the crisp, rich
training (gallery) set, comprising mostly of high-resolution (HR)
mugshot images captured in laboratory settings. To cope with
this scenario, we propose a novel dual deep-shallow channeled
generative adversarial network (D2SC-GAN) which performs
supervised domain adaptation (DA) by mapping LR degraded
probe samples to their corresponding HR gallery-like counterparts to perform closed-set face recognition. D2SC-GAN uses
a multi-component loss function comprising of multi-resolution
patchwise MSE and normalized chi-squared distance loss
functions, along with a Kullback-Leibler divergence based loss
function. Moreover, we propose a novel classroom face dataset
called the Indian Classroom Face Dataset (ICFD), which, to
the best of our knowledge, is a first of its kind and will be
helpful to explore the challenges of face recognition when
used for automatically recording the attendance in classroom
conditions. The proposed network achieves superior results
on five real-world face datasets when compared with recent
state-of-the-art deep as well as shallow supervised domain
adaptation (DA), super-resolution (SR), and degraded face
recognition (DFR) methods, which show the effectiveness of our
proposed method.
Index Terms—Face recognition, face generation, generative
adversarial networks, convolutional neural networks, classroom FR.

I. I NTRODUCTION
ACE Recognition (FR) is a well sought out problem in
the fields of Computer Vision (CV) and Deep Learning
(DL). Although conventional solutions to FR [1], [2], [3],

F

Manuscript received October 20, 2019; revised January 25, 2020; accepted
March 2, 2020. Date of publication March 30, 2020; date of current version June 23, 2020. This article was recommended for publication by
Associate Editor T. Hassner upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments.
(Corresponding author: Sukhendu Das.)
The authors are with the Visualization and Perception Laboratory,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Madras, Chennai
600036, India (e-mail: avi@cse.iitm.ac.in; sdas@iitm.ac.in).
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org, provided by the author.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBIOM.2020.2983524

[4], [5], [6] work well in constrained scenarios, they fail to
perform well in situations where the training (gallery) and
test (probe) data do not have similar distributions, such as in
classroom and surveillance settings. There have been various
attempts [7], [8], [9], [10] to solve the aforementioned problems by employing the concept of Domain Adaptation (DA).
However, the performance of these methods leaves significant
room for improvement. Although recent DL-based FR algorithms [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16] have achieved very high
accuracy even in-the-wild cases, they fail to perform well in
such real-world scenarios.
Deep Convolutional GAN [17] (DCGAN) first introduced as
a convolutional architecture led to improved visual quality in
Computer Vision (CV) applications. The BEGAN model [18]
utilizes a new equilibrium enforcing method paired with
a loss derived from the Wasserstein distance for training
auto-encoder based Generative Adversarial Networks. It also
provides a new approximate convergence measure, fast and
stable training and high visual quality. While earlier variants of GAN lacked an analytical measure of convergence,
Wasserstein GANs [19] (WGANs) recently introduced a loss
function that acts as a measure of convergence. However,
in their implementation, this comes at the expense of slow
training, but with the benefits of stability and better mode of
coverage [19]. The image-to-image translation method [20]
proposed by Isola et al., makes use of a conditional GAN
architecture to generate a crisp image from an input image
conditioned on a latent vector input. The StarGAN model [10]
proposed by Choi et al. performs image-to-image translation across multiple domains by making use of a domain
discriminator.
The DA-GAN model proposed by Zhao et al. [21], [22]
performs identity-preserving refinement of the output from
a face simulator (3D face model) using dual-agents for the
task of face recognition. The FaceID-GAN model proposed
by Shen et al. [23] makes use of additional classifier as the
third player to synthesize identity-preserving faces at various
pose angles for input face verification. However, the proposed
models in [21], [22], and [23] perform pose invariant face
recognition by first synthesizing frontal faces from input profile faces, whereas our proposed method additionally deals
with other forms of degradation such as blur, poor illumination, and occlusion, which necessitates the incorporation of

2637-6407 c
 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on September 20,2026 at 08:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

224

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMETRICS, BEHAVIOR, AND IDENTITY SCIENCE, VOL. 2, NO. 3, JULY 2020

domain adaptation into our proposed framework. Thus, our
method essentially performs a different and more difficult task
than the methods proposed in the works mentioned above.
The compact network proposed by Sun et al. [14], [24] uses
an ensemble of 25 networks, each operating on a distinct face
patch. The FaceNet model proposed by Schroff et al. [13]
uses a deep CNN to directly optimize the embedding (features) itself, based on a triplet loss formulated by a triplet
mining method. DeepFace proposed by Parkhi et al. [12]
uses a Siamese network to train on the large-scale face
datasets. The work done by Chen et al. in [25] shows that
deep neural networks learn non-linear representations that can
provide invariance to the different variations amongst data
samples. Other significant works in this area are [11], [26],
[27], which use CNN for object recognition tasks. The SMLMFKC method proposed by Banerjee and Das [28] employs
an optimal feature-kernel combination for adaptation to the
target domain. Deep Adaptation Network (DAN) proposed
by Long and Wang [29] performs domain adaptation by
minimizing the distance between the means of source and
target domain. FV_DCNN [30] proposed by Chen et al. combines Fisher vector representations with deep-CNN features for
robust face recognition and verification tasks. The work in [31]
proposes a unified supervised domain adaptation framework
using a Siamese network that finds a subspace which semantically aligns the source and target distributions and maximally
separates their classes. The work proposed by Banerjee and
Das [8] employs a novel 3-stage mutually exclusive training
algorithm for deep domain adaptation to solve the problem of
degraded FR. The GAN-based approach proposed in [9] makes
use of a novel multiscale reconstruction loss to map the target
domain samples to the source domain to perform FR.
The work by Jiang et al. [32] employs a missing intensity
interpolation method using smooth regression with local structure prior (SRLSP) to perform super-resolution (SR) of face
images. The Super-Identity Convolutional Neural Network
(SICNN) method proposed by Zhang et al. [33] performs
face hallucination by generating high-resolution (HR) face
with its identity close to the real identity of the input lowresolution face by employing the super-identity loss. The
method proposed by Li et al. [34] utilizes a GAN-pretraining
approach to further improve the performance of existing face
recognition algorithms. The Deep Coupled ResNet (DCR)
model proposed by Lu et al. [35] makes use of a single trunk
and two branch networks to minimize the difference between
the feature distribution of high and low resolution face images.
In this paper we propose a novel Generative Adversarial
Network-based method for supervised Domain Adaptation,
called Dual Deep-Shallow Channeled Generative Adversarial
Network (D2SC-GAN), which first generates HR (140 ×
140 px.) gallery-like samples from LR (35 × 35 px.) probe
samples given as input, which are then recognized using
an auxiliary discriminator (in closed-set FR settings) [9],
[36]. The proposed model makes use of a novel dual
channel generator (a shallow-deep pair) network, where
the shallow and deep channels capture the low and high
frequency components respectively, of the LR probe (input)
images to generate corresponding HR gallery-like image

samples. Capturing both the frequency ranges ensure the
improvement in contrast and enhancement of the features on
the discriminative parts of the probe samples while creating super-resolved face samples. To achieve this task, the
network minimizes a novel “Multi-resolution reconstruction
(MRR)” loss function, consisting of “Multi-Resolution Patchwise Mean squared error (MR_PMSE)” and Normalized χ 2
distance (NCD) loss components. The generator network also
minimizes the negative of a “Kullback-Leibler divergence
(KLD)” based loss component in the objective function. The
MR_PMSE, by its formulation, captures holistic as well as
pixel-level differences between the gallery and probe sets.
The KLD loss ensures that the pair of generators correctly
capture the different frequency components in the input classroom/surveillance face images over both the channels. Finally,
the NCD loss ensures correct color reproduction in the
generated samples.
Additionally, we also propose the Indian Classroom Face
Dataset (ICFD) which consists of images of 84 subjects
captured in both controlled laboratory (for training) and unconstrained classroom settings (for probes). To the best of our
knowledge, this dataset is the first of its kind and will help
researchers to explore the challenges present in performing
face recognition in unconstrained classroom settings for the
purpose of classroom attendance and search. Extensive experimentations and ablation studies performed on 4 other realworld face datasets reveal the effectiveness of our proposed
D2SC-GAN model.
II. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
The overall architecture of the proposed model is illustrated
in Fig. 1. The network consists of two generators (shallow and
deep) and a discriminator. The motivation of using two generator architectures comes from [37], which says that shallow
networks inherently capture the low-frequency components
of the image, whereas the deep networks capture the details
(high-frequency components) in the images. Thus, a combination of these two networks when used for image SR provides
better results when compared to that using a single generator
network. We exploit this idea using two generator modules, a
shallow generator GS and a deep generator GD for the purpose
of reconstructing HR gallery-like face images from input LR
probe faces. The discriminator D performs two tasks, identifying when the input image is fake or real (i.e., generated
or ground-truth) and classifying the input image to obtain the
class (ID). The individual components of the networks are
explained in details subsequently.
The architecture of the shallow generator model (GS ) is
shown in Fig. 2. The details of each layer is given in the
color coded diagram. The CONV_2D_N[(f , f ), #F] denotes
the N th 2D convolution layer having F number of f × f filters. DENSE_N[D] represents the N th Linear layer of D nodes.
RESHAPE[(m, n), #N] operation reshapes the previous layer
output into a tensor of shape Rm×n×N , while the FLATTEN
operation transforms the previous layer output into a single dimensional tensor. UPSAMPLING_2D operation performs
unpooling on the previous layer output and is further detailed
in [38].

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on September 20,2026 at 08:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BHATTACHARJEE AND DAS: D2SC-GAN: DUAL DEEP-SHALLOW CHANNELED GENERATIVE ADVERSARIAL NETWORK

225

Fig. 1. The overall architecture of the proposed D2SC-GAN method. IP refers to the probe images provided as input to GS and GD , which are the shallow
and deep generator networks. The output of these two networks is averaged to obtain IG , which is passed to the discriminator D, which distinguishes real
(IGal ) from fake/synthesized images (IG ) along with the classification of generated images.

Fig. 2.

Architecture details of the shallow generator GS .

The architecture of the deep generator model (GD ) is shown
in Fig. 3. The notations used in this diagram have been
described in the previous paragraph. An appreciably larger
depth of the architecture is purposefully provided as it is
required to capture finer details of face image using highfrequency components. The deep and shallow networks help
to capture the high and low-frequency components of the
generated image respectively, ensuring superior reconstruction
performance of the proposed model.
It may be noted that the proposed architectural model
for the generator should be treated as a concept, and the
researchers may explore different variations of the generator
architectures available in literature [39], [40] to seek better results. The architecture details presented here has been
decided empirically after rigorous experimentations.
The discriminator model (D) architecture is shown in Fig. 4.
The MAXPOOLING_2D_N[H, W] as shown in the figure performs the N th maxpool operation over a window of size H×W.

Fig. 3.

Architecture details of the deep generator model GD .

The network performs two tasks: (i) identify the input image
as real or fake (corresponding to output branch Dbin ) and
(ii) classify the input image into the corresponding classes
(Dcls ).
III. L OSS F UNCTIONS FOR D2SC-GAN
The D2SC-GAN model minimizes a multi-objective loss
function during training. The individual loss functions are
described in the following sections, followed by the formulation of overall loss function of the proposed D2SC-GAN
model.
A. Categorical Cross Entropy Loss
The categorical cross-entropy [41] loss function is used to
train deep neural networks having sigmoid outputs for the task

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on September 20,2026 at 08:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

226

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMETRICS, BEHAVIOR, AND IDENTITY SCIENCE, VOL. 2, NO. 3, JULY 2020

C. Kullback-Leibler Divergence Based Loss

Fig. 4. Architectural details of the auxiliary discriminator model D. It performs the task of identifying real image from generated (fake) one, along with
classifying the generated images to the corresponding identities.

Algorithm 1: Multi-Resolution Reconstruction (MRR)
Loss
B )
function Lmrr (IGB , IGal
B ← 20; Lmrr ← 0
B } do
foreach {IG , IGal } in {IGB , IGal
Lncd := NCD(h(IG ), h(IGal ))
Lmrp := MR_PMSE(IG , IGal )
L +L
Lmrr := Lmrr + ncd 2 mrp
Lmrr
Lavg := BATCH_SIZE
return Lavg

Lcxe y, y0



where, X and Y denotes the two images (converted to
grayscale before computation), h(·) returns
√ 64-dimensional
histogram of the input image, M = h(X) ◦ h(Y) where
◦ denotes element-wise multiplication operator of two vectors, and Kullback-Leibler Divergence [42] measure K(·, ·) is
defined as:
L

Qj
(3)
Pj log
K(P, Q) = −
Pj
j=1

of classification. This loss function is defined as:


As the proposed architecture consists of both shallow
and deep networks which captures the low and highfrequency components of the images respectively, we propose
a Kullback-Leibler divergence (KLD) based loss function,
which is maximized (equivalent to minimization of negative
of the loss). While the popular Jensen-Shannon divergence
loss ensures that both the channels learn different aspects of
an image (without knowing whether both channels are actually
involved in the reconstruction task), the nature of the proposed
loss function ensures that both channels have equal participation for generation of the HR gallery-like samples from
the input LR probe images, taking advantage of the inherent nature of the shallow and deep models to capture low and
high frequency components of an image respectively. The loss
function is given as:

1  2
K (h(X), M) + K 2 (h(Y), M)
Lkld (h(X), h(Y)) =
2
− K(h(X), M) − K(h(Y), M)1 (2)

n
 


1  (i)
(i)
y0 ln y(i) + 1 − y0 ln 1 − y(i)
=−
n
i=1

(1)
where, y = {y(1) , . . . , y(n) } is the predicted sigmoid output
of the neural network corresponding to the input images, and
(1)
(n)
y0 = {y0 , . . . , y0 } is the corresponding actual labels for the
same input samples.
B. Multi-Resolution Reconstruction (MRR) Loss
We propose a novel Multi-resolution reconstruction (MRR)
loss which enables the generator to perform the task of generating gallery-like crisp high-resolution (HR) images from the
input low-resolution (LR) probe samples. The purpose of this
loss function is to ensure accurate reconstruction of the face
by focusing on minute details as well as the overall structure
of the generated face. The outline of evaluating the proposed
B refer to the genloss is shown in Algorithm 1. IGB and IGal
erated and corresponding ground-truth gallery images having
batch size B. The individual images of the batch are denoted
by IG and IGal respectively. The MR_PMSE loss function,
defined later in Section III-E, ensures preservation of minute
details along with the overall facial layout by incorporating a
novel multi-resolution approach. The NCD loss (Section III-D)
applied channel-wise, ensures correct color reproduction in the
generated images, consistent with the gallery images.

where, P and Q denotes vectors from two different distributions with same vector length L.
D. Normalized χ 2 Distance Loss
It has been empirically found that the images generated
by the MR_PMSE loss are not always color correct, having
changes in skin tone and hair color, which is undesirable in
any generated image. To overcome this issue, we propose the
Normalized χ 2 Distance (NCD) loss. The χ 2 distance [43],
[44] is a well-known metric useful for finding the difference
between histograms. We employ this metric to produce color
correct facial images by minimizing the χ 2 distance between
the 2 -normalized channel-wise histograms of the generated
and the ground-truth images. The loss is defined as:
|C| |b|

Lncd (h(X), h(Y)) =

1   (h(X c )[i] − h(Y c )[i])2
2|b||C|
(h(X c )[i] + h(Y c )[i])
c=1 i=1

(4)
where, |C| denotes the number of channels in the input image,
X c and Y c denotes the channel c of the two images X and Y,
h(·) returns |b|-binned 2 -normalized histogram of the input
image channel and h(·)[i] is the ith element in the |b|-binned
histogram.
E. Multi-Resolution Patch-Wise MSE Loss
Inspired by the Patch-wise MSE (PMSE) loss as proposed
by [9], we introduce a novel multi-resolution Patch-wise MSE

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on September 20,2026 at 08:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BHATTACHARJEE AND DAS: D2SC-GAN: DUAL DEEP-SHALLOW CHANNELED GENERATIVE ADVERSARIAL NETWORK

227

Fig. 5. Few samples from the probe set of ICFD exhibiting: (a) poor illumination with low contrast/resolution, (b) blur, (c) occlusion and (d) pose variations
present in the dataset. The samples in red outline indicate faces captured using a mobile (Samsung S9) camera. Figure best viewed in color.

(MR_PMSE) loss in which we extract patches at various resolution (small to large) from both generated and ground truth
image to calculate the mean-squared error between them. It is
worth noting that while the MSE between a pair of the small
patches ensures that details of the image are preserved, the
MSE between the large patches preserves the holistic layout
of the generated faces. The MSE between two images im1 and
im2 , is calculated as:
MSE(im1 , im2 ) =

|C| |im
1 | |im
1|




(i,j,k)

im1

(i,j,k) 2

− im2

(5)

i=1 j=1 k=1

where, |C| & |im1 | specifies the number of channels and pixels
across height/width (assuming both are same for experimental purposes) for the input image. im(i,j,k) refers to the pixel
located at position (j, k) in the channel i of the image im.
The outline for evaluating MR_PMSE along with the values
of the hyper-parameters used, are detailed in Appendix A of
the supplementary document.
IV. OVERALL L OSS F UNCTIONS OF
P ROPOSED D2SC-GAN
The generator of the proposed D2SC-GAN minimizes the
following loss function:
Ladv
, IG )
G (IP , IGal , IG1 , IG2
= Lcxe Dbin (IG ), 1 + Lcxe (Dcls (IG ), y)
+ Lmrr (IG , IGal ) − Lkld (h(IG1 ), h(IG2 ))

Fig. 6. Few samples from the the Gallery set of ICFD showing variations in
yaw and pitch angles. Samples in the 1st row shows variations in yaw alone,
while those in the 2nd row exhibits variations in yaw as well as pitch angles.
Figure best viewed in color.

(6)

where, IP indicates the probe samples used as input to GS
and GD with y as the corresponding label, IGal denotes the
gallery samples of the dataset, IG1 and IG2 are the resultant
outputs from the two generators GS and GD respectively (with
IP as input), while their element-wise average is denoted by
IG , subsequently called enhanced-probes. Lmrr (·, ·) is defined
in Algorithm 1, Lkld (·, ·) has been previously defined in equation (2) and Lcxe (·, ·) is given in equation (1). Binary Output
branch of the discriminator is represented as Dbin , whereas
Dcls refers to the classifier branch of the discriminator D.
The Lcxe loss in equation (6) ensures that the generated faces
are similar to the gallery-like images. The Lmrr loss ensures
generation of crisp high-resolution gallery-like images from
low-resolution probe images. Finally, the negative of Lkld loss
ensures that the two generators are equally involved in capturing distinct components of the input image as discussed earlier
in Section III-C.

The discriminator of the D2SC-GAN model minimizes the
overall loss function as:






D
D
Ladv
,
I
=
L
1
+
L
0
(I
)
(I
),
(I
),
Gal
G
cxe
bin
Gal
cxe
bin
G
D
+ Lcxe (Dcls (IG ), y)

(7)

where, the first two terms in the loss function ensures that
the discriminator correctly identifies an original image from a
synthetically generated face, while the last term ensures correct classification of the generated images in a closed-set FR
setting.
V. I NDIAN C LASSROOM FACE DATASET (ICFD)
With the advent of Deep Learning, and its requirement of
large training datasets, we have seen a rise in large-scale face
datasets. However, to the best of our knowledge, no dataset
has been created to explore the challenges present in performing face recognition in unconstrained classroom/seminar room
scenarios. We propose the “Indian Classroom Face Dataset”
to address this issue.
The proposed dataset consists of 84 subjects consisting of
63 male and 21 females having 178 thousand images which
are distributed into two categories: gallery and probe. For
the gallery set, the face images of the subject were captured
in controlled laboratory settings with adequate illumination
conditions without any form of real-world perturbations. The
subjects were seated at a distance of around 2 meters from
a Nikon D7200 DSLR camera and were asked to move their
head to capture images at various pitch and yaw angles as
shown in Fig. 6. The average resolution of the gallery samples
is 400 × 350 px (cropped using a standard off-the-shelf face
detector [45]) with each subject having close to 900 samples
at an average.
The probe samples were captured in various classrooms and
seminar rooms using the same DSLR camera as well as a
Samsung S9 mobile-camera, where volunteers were instructed

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on September 20,2026 at 08:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

228

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMETRICS, BEHAVIOR, AND IDENTITY SCIENCE, VOL. 2, NO. 3, JULY 2020

Fig. 7. The probe samples on the top row and the corresponding results generated by our proposed method at the bottom row, for (a) ICFD, (b) FR_SURV [46],
(c) TIPD [4], (d) Chokepoint [47] and (e) ScFace [48] datasets. Boxes in red indicate mismatches between the identity of the generated face and the
corresponding probe sample. Figure best viewed in color.

to stare at the dais/screen in front to create a realistic classroom scenario. Two types of videos were acquired using
(i) a Samsung S9 mobile camera which was moved sideways across the dais in front of the audience, and (ii) with
a DSLR camera in pan-mode at the center of the dais in front
of the audience at a reasonable height. Two lighting conditions were used while acquiring videos for a subset of the
test probes (42 subjects) in classroom conditions: (i) maximum illumination possible in the classroom with all lights
turned on, and (ii) low illumination conditions where the all
room lights were switched off and an empty white slide was
projected onto the projector screen in front of the audience,
which acted as the sole source of light in this case. More
details of acquisition are given in [49]. The unconstrained
nature of the classroom/seminar rooms leads to the presence
of various degradations such as poor-illumination and contrast
(Fig. 5 (a)), blur, caused due to low-resolution of the images
captured as well as head movements made by the volunteers
(Fig. 5 (b)), partial occlusions (Fig. 5(c)) and pose variations
(Fig. 5(d)) in the captured images. The average resolution
of the probe samples, post cropping using MTCNN [45], is
110 × 80 px, with each subject having about 1250 samples
at an average combining all images captured in different settings. More samples from the dataset along with the statistics
of each partition has been provided in Appendix B of the supplementary document. A part of the dataset can be downloaded
from [49].
VI. E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP AND R ESULTS
The experimentations are performed on a machine with
Dual-Xeon processor and 256GB RAM, having an Nvidia
Tesla V100 (32GB). The implementations are all coded in
Keras 2.1.6 platform using Tensorflow (1.8.0)-backend. The
model weights were all randomly initialized and required
training for 30-72 hours on the GPU. The batch size was
kept to 20 and the gallery and probe images were resized to
140×140 and 35×35 pixels using bicubic interpolation across

TABLE I
DATASET PARTITION S TRATEGY FOR A LL F IVE R EAL -W ORLD FACE
DATASETS U SED FOR T RAINING AND T ESTING , A LONG W ITH THE
N UMBER OF C LASSES IN E ACH DATASET. VALUES D O N OT I NCLUDE
T HAT U SED FOR DATA AUGMENTATION TO T RAIN D2SC-GAN

all datasets. The following sections talks about the setup used
for experimentation followed by the experimental results.
A. Experimental Setup
We perform experimentations on 5 real-world face datasets:
Chokepoint [47], Scface [48], TIPD [50], FR_SURV [46] and
the proposed ICFD. To show the superiority of the proposed
method, we have performed experimentations in two setups.
In the first case, we show the advantage of using the generator
of our proposed model as a preprocessing step over conventional (non-DA) method. We compare the jump in performance
due to the use of enhanced-probes generated by our proposed
method instead of the generic probe samples, for training
the non-DA methods. For experimentation, we use the entire
gallery set and 15% of the probe (or enhanced probe) samples
per subject for training these models, while using the rest of
the probe (or enhanced probe) set for testing purposes.
In the second case, we show the superiority of our
method by both the qualitative (enhanced probe generation performance) and quantitative (Rank-1 recognition/identification rates) comparison of the performance of
our model, with several state-of-the-art supervised Domain
Adaptation (DA), super-resolution (SR) and degraded FR
(DFR) techniques. As is prevalent with the supervised DA

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on September 20,2026 at 08:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BHATTACHARJEE AND DAS: D2SC-GAN: DUAL DEEP-SHALLOW CHANNELED GENERATIVE ADVERSARIAL NETWORK

229

Fig. 8. Comparison of faces generated by our method with (b) DCGAN [17], (c) BEGAN [18], (d) Isola et al. [20], (e) StarGAN [10], (f) LR-GAN [9],
(g) SRLSP [32] and (h) SICNN [33] with our method (l) on the five real-world datasets. (a) denotes the input image, (i), (j) and (k) shows the ablation
studies with generation results when employing (i) MR_PMSE + Adversarial + classification loss, (j) NCD + Adversarial + classification loss and (k)
MR_PMSE + NCD + Adversarial + classification losses respectively, while (m) shows the corresponding ground-truth gallery face. Figure best viewed in
color.

experimental setup [9], [51], we use the complete gallery set
along with ∼ 15% of the probe set (per subject) for the domain
adaptation. We follow the same protocol for training the SR
and DFR models as well. The data split used for our experimentation purposes is shown in Table I. It should, however, be
noted that we need paired data for training the D2SC-GAN,
where each pair (<gallery, probe>) belongs to the same identity. For training the D2SC-GAN, the probe samples are fed to
the network, which minimizes the novel MRR loss to generate
gallery-like images.
B. Experimental Results
We divide this section into two parts to showcase the
qualitative and quantitative results. In the qualitative results
sub-section, we visually compare the generated results for
all five datasets along with their PSNR/SSIM metric values
w.r.t. the ground truth images. Also, we show the advantage
of using a dual-channel generator instead of a single-channel
generator for the GAN, by demonstrating the results (face
images) generated by each channel individually along with the
dual-channel after training for the same number of epochs.
Later, in the quantitative results, we show the advantage
of using our method as a preprocessing step for conventional deep classifiers by comparing the rank-1 recognition
rates with state-of-the-art supervised DA (SDA), SR and DFR
techniques.
1) Qualitative Results: The generated results for the above
mentioned five datasets using the proposed method are shown
in Fig. 7. The boxes in red shows discrepancy between the
identities in the probes and the corresponding generated faces
by the proposed technique.
In order to compare the performance of our method with
other state-of-the-art generative models, we compare the

performance of our generated results with DCGAN [17],
BEGAN [18], Isola et al. [20], StarGAN [10], LR-GAN [9],
SRLSP [32] and SICNN [33] methods. Figure 8 shows
the performance of our method with the aforementioned
state-of-the-art methods on the five datasets. Additionally,
we also show the generation performance of our model
when employing different components of our proposed loss
function. It can be seen that our method vastly outperforms all other methods in the generation task in terms of
PSNR/SSIM values, reported below the generated images
respectively. The SR method SRLSP [32] performs the
worst which shows that this class of methods are not capable of handling domain discrepancy between the training
and test data. The generation results of ablation studies
when using combinations of: (i) MR_PMSE + Adversarial
(Adv.) + Classification (Cls.) loss, (ii) NCD + Adv. + Cls.
loss and (iii) MR_PMSE + NCD + Adv. + Cls. loss components are shown in the columns as Fig. 8(i), Fig. 8(j) and
Fig. 8(k) respectively. It can be seen that in case (i) the skin
color has not been reproduced correctly in patches of the face.
As NCD is not a discriminative loss function, the faces generated for case (ii) are not very discriminative, but correctly
capturing the skin-tone of the faces. The structure of the faces
have been captured however, due to the presence of the classification loss. The combination of loss components in case
(iii) provides better synthetic results as compared to (i) and
(ii). However, we achieve best generation results when adding
the KLD loss component to the losses in case (iii) as shown in
Fig. 8(l). Thus, we can conclude that the MR_PMSE loss function has maximum contribution for reconstruction, followed by
the NCD and KLD loss functions respectively.
The proposed method provides best performance on the
Chokepoint dataset [47] due to a significant similarity between
the source and target data distributions. The performance of

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on September 20,2026 at 08:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

230

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMETRICS, BEHAVIOR, AND IDENTITY SCIENCE, VOL. 2, NO. 3, JULY 2020

Fig. 9. Improvement in rank-1 recognition rates of CNN-based methods for FR (without DA) using D2SC-GAN on FR_SURV (FSV) [46], SCface (SCF) [48],
Chokepoint (CP) [47], TIP (TIP-D) [4] and the proposed ICF datasets respectively, for the methods mentioned below each set of bar-charts. For each bar, the
blue color shows the performance of the deep model when trained with gallery and 15% of the probe samples, while the red color indicates the enhancement
achieved in performance by using 15% of the enhanced-probe samples obtained from D2SC-GAN (instead of the raw probe samples) along with gallery to
train the models. Figure best viewed in color.

our method on the TIP dataset [4] is second best. The worst
performance is exhibited on our proposed ICF dataset due to
a gamut of challenges (pose variations, poor illumination, blur
and occlusion) present in the dataset, a combination of which
cannot be found in any of the other datasets available. Please
note that all the other face datasets captured using surveillance
cameras are near frontal. The particularly poor performances
of all other methods on ICFD highlights the complexity level
of the dataset.
To quantify the performance of face generation by our
method, we also show the average PNSR/SSIM values for
the generation tasks and compare them with the other stateof-the-art methods in Table II. The proposed method performs
the best while SRLSP [32] performs the worst. The jump in
performance of our approach when compared to the LR-GAN
model shows the effectiveness of using dual-channel models
along with the proposed multi-resolution reconstruction loss
for generation tasks. The average PSNR/SSIM values obtained
when employing different components of loss functions are
also reported in Table II, which follows the conclusion of our
discussion about the importance of different components of
the proposed loss function.
Fig. 10 shows the rate of convergence of our proposed
model with and without using the KLD-based loss function.
The red line shows the convergence without KLD-based loss
whereas the blue line shows the convergence of our model
using the KLD-based loss function. We observe that the model
achieves a higher PNSR value and converges faster when using
the proposed KLD-based loss function. In Table II, we also
report the average PSNR/SSIM when using only 5% and 10%
of probe samples per subject during training of our model.
We notice a moderate decrease in performance of our model
across all datasets when using only 5% of the probe samples.
There is, however, a substantial increase in performance of our
model when trained using 10% probe samples per subject.
Figure 11 shows the advantage of using the dual-channel for
reconstruction on the FR_SURV [46] and the proposed ICF
dataset. The images in column (a) is the input to the model,

Fig. 10. Convergence of our proposed model in terms of Average PSNR
values per epoch for ICF dataset. Red curve indicates model trained without
KLD-based loss function whereas blue curve indicates model trained with
KLD-based loss. End indicates the point of convergence of the models during
training.

Fig. 11. Face from FR_SURV dataset [46] (top row) and ICFD (bottom
row) generated from (a) after 600 epochs, using (b) only GS , (c) only GD
and (d) both GS and GD with (e) being the ground-truth. Figure best viewed
in color.

followed by the generated results from the (b) shallow (GS ),
(c) deep (GD ) and (d) dual-channel (GS +GD ) models after 600
epochs. It can be observed that the output from the shallow
channel (GS ) preserves the low-frequency components while
lacking in sharpness, whereas the output from the deep channel
(GD ) preserves the sharpness (high-frequency components) of

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on September 20,2026 at 08:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BHATTACHARJEE AND DAS: D2SC-GAN: DUAL DEEP-SHALLOW CHANNELED GENERATIVE ADVERSARIAL NETWORK

TABLE II
T HE AVERAGE PSNR (PART A) AND SSIM (PART B) VALUES OF
S YNTHESIZED FACES FOR THE 5 DATASETS FR_SURV [46] (FSV),
TIP-D [4], S C FACE [48] (SCF), C HOKEPOINT [47] (CKP) AND THE
P ROPOSED ICFD, OF O UR P ROPOSED M ETHOD C OMPARED TO
DCGAN [17], BEGAN [18], I SOLA et al. [20], S TAR GAN [10],
LR-GAN [9], SRLSP [32] AND SICNN [33]. AVERAGE PSNR/SSIM
VALUES O BTAINED W HEN E MPLOYING D IFFERENT C OMPONENTS OF THE
P ROPOSED L OSS F UNCTION AND FOR D IFFERENT P ERCENTAGES OF
P ROBE S AMPLES (P ER S UBJECT ) U SED FOR T RAINING A RE A LSO
R EPORTED . R ESULTS IN B OLD AND I TALICS I NDICATES B EST AND
S ECOND -B EST P ERFORMANCES R ESPECTIVELY

the image but fails to capture the accurate illumination and
color variations present in the corresponding gallery image.
The output from the dual channel generator (Fig. 11 (d)) is the
closest to the ground-truth image (Fig. 11(e)) which shows the
effectiveness of using the proposed method for reconstruction
purposes.
2) Quantitative Results: In this section, we showcase the
capability of our method in two ways. Firstly, we report
the Rank-1 recognition rates for few state-of-the-art nonDA deep-CNN methods when using probes/enhanced probes
along with the gallery for training the models. Secondly, we
compare our the Rank-1 recognition/identification rates with
that of several state-of-the-art supervised Domain Adaptation,
super-resolution (SR) as well as degraded FR (DFR) methods.
The rank-1 recognition rates for non-DA methods are
reported in the set of bar-charts in Fig. 9. For each bar, the
blue color shows the performance of the deep model when

231

TABLE III
C OMPARATIVE S TUDY OF P ERFORMANCE W ITH THE R ECENT
S UPERVISED DA-BASED , SR AND DFR M ETHODS (W ITH AND W ITHOUT
CNN) IN T ERMS OF R ANK -1 R ECOGNITION /I DENTIFICATION R ATES ( IN
%). R ESULTS IN B OLD , I TALICS AND U NDERLINE I NDICATE THE B EST,
S ECOND -B EST AND T HIRD -B EST P ERFORMANCES , R ESPECTIVELY

trained with gallery and 15% of the probe samples, while the
red color indicates the enhancement achieved by using the
same set of 15% of the enhanced-probe samples generated by
D2SC-GAN (instead of the probe samples) along with gallery
to train the models. Inception-Resnet-V2 [52] performs the
best while AlexNet [26] performs the worst with VGG-19 [11]
performing the second best. The considerable increase in accuracy (denoted by the red color segment in each bar in Fig. 9)
obtained by using the enhanced probes instead of the original
probe samples, shows the advantage of using the generator of
the proposed method as a preprocessing step for recognition
tasks.
The rank-1 recognition rates for deep and conventional
state-of-the-art supervised DA, SR as well as DFR methods
are reported in Table III. In case of SICNN [33], DCR [35]
and Centerloss [53] + [34] methods, we have reported the
Rank-1 identification rates. Our method (when using GS +GD ,
at the bottom row) performs the best for all datasets, while
SRLSP [32] performs the worst. The proposed method performs the second best when using only 10% of the probe
samples. The second-best performance (excluding the variants
of the proposed method) is shown by LR-GAN [9] while
CCSA [31] comes a close third. The enhancement in the
performance when using GS + GD , instead of either GS or
GD alone, shows the effectiveness of the dual-channel architecture for reconstruction tasks. Our method outperforms all
SR as well as DFR methods by a large margin as these methods are not designed to overcome large domain discrepancies.
The performance of our model when employing different loss
components again follows the conclusion from our discussion regarding the importance of different components of the
proposed loss function in Section VI-B1. There is a moderate

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on September 20,2026 at 08:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

232

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMETRICS, BEHAVIOR, AND IDENTITY SCIENCE, VOL. 2, NO. 3, JULY 2020

Fig. 12. 2D visualization of features extracted from face samples of ICFD before and after DA, using tSNE [54]. (a) shows the scatter of samples from
gallery and probes sets, while (b) shows the scatter of same gallery samples but with the enhanced-probe set obtained using DA of our proposed method on
the same set of probes in (a). 20 samples from 10 subjects are used for illustration. Different colors represent different classes/subjects. Figure best viewed
in color.

decrease in performance of our proposed method when using
5% of the probe samples per subject instead of 15%. The
performance, however, increases substantially when using 10%
of the probe samples per class instead of 15%. In general, all
methods perform best for the Chokepoint dataset while performing worst for the ICF dataset, exhibiting the difficulty
of performing face recognition in unconstrained classroom
scenarios which have not been explored in the past. Further
experimental results on the various subsets of probes of the
proposed ICF dataset have been provided in Appendix C
of the supplementary document. We have also reported the
performance of our model in comparison to CCSA [31] and
LR-GAN [9] on two other challenging datasets (LFW [55]
and IJB-A [56]), both qualitatively and quantitatively, in
Appendix D of the supplementary document.
To visually illustrate the logic behind the effectiveness of
domain adaptation of our proposed method, we separately
visualize the scatterplots of 20 raw probe and enhanced probe
samples, along with the corresponding gallery samples in 2D
for ten subjects (chosen at random) from ICFD, on a t-SNE
plot [54] using features extracted from a pre-trained VGGFace network for unbiased visualization. The scatter plot in
Fig. 12(a) shows that although the gallery samples are properly clustered and well-separated in the feature space, the
probe samples of different classes on the other hand, have
a significant inter-class overlap (over each other) with barely
much of class-wise separability, as the corresponding gallery
classes. In fact the probe samples over all classes tend to relatively cluster more as a bunch together, (observe in Fig. 12(a),
the dense scatter of  markers) which is unlike the gallery
samples. The probe samples are also not close to their corresponding classwise gallery counterparts, which explains the
poor-performance of non-DA deep methods when trained with

gallery and original probes samples. The plot in Fig. 12(b)
shows the effectiveness of our method in bridging the gap
between the source and target domain by performing a targetto-source domain mapping. The enhanced-probe samples now
form compact class-wise clusters close to the corresponding
gallery counterparts with large inter-class separability, thus
providing the basis of enhanced performance of the deep
non-DA methods. When a few of enhanced-probe samples
(generated by the proposed D2SC-GAN) are used instead
of the original probe samples for training these classifiers
(see Fig. 9), large inter-class separability in feature domain
and formation of compact intra-class clusters of the samples,
overlapping with their corresponding classwise gallery (training) clusters, automatically provides sufficient support for any
classifier to work with enriched performance.
VII. C ONCLUSION
The proposed D2SC-GAN model uses a novel dualchanneled generator architecture to synthesize crisp, highresolution (HR) gallery-like face images from low-resolution
probe samples by minimizing a novel generator loss with
the multi-resolution reconstruction component and KullbackLeibler divergence-based component, which has numerous
applications in the field of biometrics along with a discriminator to perform classification of the generated faces. The model
can also be used as a preprocessing technique to transform
LR probe samples to their corresponding HR gallery-like face
images for FR as well as FV tasks. The model also performs
the task of closed-set face recognition. The method effectively
performs the task of DA by bridging the gap between the
crisp gallery faces and probes with real-world degradation.
We also propose the Indian Classroom Face Dataset (ICFD)

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on September 20,2026 at 08:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BHATTACHARJEE AND DAS: D2SC-GAN: DUAL DEEP-SHALLOW CHANNELED GENERATIVE ADVERSARIAL NETWORK

which to the best of our knowledge is the first of its kind and
will help researchers to explore the challenges present in performing FR in classroom settings. Rigorous experimentations
of the proposed model on five real-world face datasets show
the superiority of our proposed method. We plan to overcome
the limitation of open-set face recognition by incorporating
unsupervised domain adaptation instead of supervised domain
adaptation into our framework, as a future scope of our work.
R EFERENCES
[1] A. S. Georghiades, P. N. Belhumeur, and D. J. Kriegman, “From few
to many: Illumination cone models for face recognition under variable
lighting and pose,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 23,
no. 6, pp. 643–660, Jun. 2001.
[2] T. Ahonen, A. Hadid, and M. Pietikainen, “Face description with local
binary patterns: Application to face recognition,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 28, no. 12, pp. 2037–2041, Dec. 2006.
[3] W.-Y. Zhao, R. Chellappa, P. J. Phillips, and A. Rosenfeld, “Face recognition: A literature survey,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 35, no. 4,
pp. 399–458, 2003.
[4] A. Punnappurath, A. N. Rajagopalan, S. Taheri, R. Chellappa, and
G. Seetharaman, “Face recognition across non-uniform motion blur,
illumination, and pose,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 24, no. 7,
pp. 2067–2082, Jul. 2015.
[5] I. Masi, Y. Wu, T. Hassner, and P. Natarajan, “Deep face recognition:
A survey,” in Proc. IEEE SIBGRAPI Conf. Graph. Patterns Images
(SIBGRAPI), 2018, pp. 471–478.
[6] A. Bhattacharjee, S. Banerjee, and S. Das, “PosIX-GAN: Generating
multiple poses using GAN for pose-invariant face recognition,” in Proc.
Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Workshops (ECCVW), 2018, pp. 427–443.
[7] S. Banerjee and S. Das, “Domain adaptation with soft-margin multiple
feature-kernel learning beats deep learning for surveillance face recognition,” 2016. [Online]. Available: arXiv:1610.01374.
[8] S. Banerjee and S. Das, “Mutual variation of information on
transfer-CNN for face recognition with degraded probe samples,”
Neurocomputing, vol. 310, pp. 299–315, 2018.
[9] S. Banerjee and S. Das, “LR-GAN for degraded face recognition,”
Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 116, pp. 246–253, Dec. 2018.
[10] Y. Choi, M.-J. Choi, M. Kim, J.-W. Ha, S. Kim, and J. Choo, “StarGAN:
Unified generative adversarial networks for multi-domain image-toimage translation,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), 2018, pp. 8789–8797.
[11] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks
for large-scale image recognition,” 2014. [Online]. Available:
arXiv:1409.1556.
[12] O. M. Parkhi, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman, “Deep face recognition,”
in Proc. Brit. Mach. Vis. Conf. (BMVC), 2015, p. 6.
[13] F. Schroff, D. Kalenichenko, and J. Philbin, “FaceNet: A unified embedding for face recognition and clustering,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2015, pp. 815–823.
[14] Y. Sun, D. Liang, X. Wang, and X. Tang, “DeepID3: Face recognition with very deep neural networks,” 2015. [Online]. Available:
arXiv:1502.00873.
[15] Y. Taigman, M. Yang, M. Ranzato, and L. Wolf, “DeepFace: Closing
the gap to human-level performance in face verification,” in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2014, pp. 1701–1708.
[16] P. Li, L. Prieto, D. Mery, and P. Flynn, “Face recognition in low quality
images: A survey,” 2018. [Online]. Available: arXiv:1805.11519.
[17] A. Radford, L. Metz, and S. Chintala, “Unsupervised representation
learning with deep convolutional generative adversarial networks,” 2015.
[Online]. Available: arXiv:1511.06434.
[18] D. Berthelot, T. Schumm, and L. Metz, “Began: Boundary equilibrium generative adversarial networks,” 2017. [Online]. Available:
arXiv:1703.10717.
[19] M. Arjovsky, S. Chintala, and L. Bottou, “Wasserstein GAN,” 2017.
[Online]. Available: arXiv:1701.07875.
[20] P. Isola, J.-Y. Zhu, T. Zhou, and A. A. Efros, “Image-to-image translation
with conditional adversarial networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2017, pp. 1125–1134.
[21] J. Zhao et al., “Dual-agent GANs for photorealistic and identity
preserving profile face synthesis,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst. (NIPS), 2017, pp. 66–76.

233

[22] J. Zhao, L. Xiong, J. Li, J. Xing, S. Yan, and J. Feng, “3D-aided dualagent GANs for unconstrained face recognition,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 2380–2394, Oct. 2019.
[23] Y. Shen, P. Luo, J. Yan, X. Wang, and X. Tang, “FaceID-GAN: Learning
a symmetry three-player GAN for identity-preserving face synthesis,”
in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2018,
pp. 821–830.
[24] Y. Sun, X. Wang, and X. Tang, “Deep learning face representation from
predicting 10,000 classes,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), 2014, pp. 1891–1898.
[25] M. Chen, K. Q. Weinberger, F. Sha, and Y. Bengio, “Marginalized
denoising auto-encoders for nonlinear representations,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2014, pp. 1476–1484.
[26] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “ImageNet classification with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst. (NIPS), 2012, pp. 1097–1105.
[27] J. Hoffman et al., “LSDA: Large scale detection through adaptation,” in
Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NIPS), 2014, pp. 3536–3544.
[28] S. Banerjee and S. Das, “Soft-margin learning for multiple feature-kernel
combinations with domain adaptation, for recognition in surveillance
face dataset,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
Workshops (CVPRW) Biometrics, 2016, pp. 169–174.
[29] M. Long, Y. Cao, J. Wang, and M. I. Jordan, “Learning transferable
features with deep adaptation networks,” 2015. [Online]. Available:
arXiv:1502.02791.
[30] J.-C. Chen, J. Zheng, V. M. Patel, and R. Chellappa, “Fisher vector
encoded deep convolutional features for unconstrained face verification,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Image Process. (ICIP), 2016, pp. 2981–2985.
[31] S. Motiian, M. Piccirilli, D. A. Adjeroh, and G. Doretto, “Unified deep
supervised domain adaptation and generalization,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), 2017, pp. 5715–5725.
[32] J. Jiang, C. Chen, J. Ma, Z. Wang, Z. Wang, and R. Hu, “SRLSP:
A face image super-resolution algorithm using smooth regression with
local structure prior,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 27–40,
Aug. 2016.
[33] K. Zhang et al., “Super-identity convolutional neural network for
face hallucination,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2018,
pp. 183–198.
[34] P. Li, L. Prieto, D. Mery, and P. J. Flynn, “On low-resolution face recognition in the wild: Comparisons and new techniques,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Forensics Security, vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 2000–2012, Aug. 2019.
[35] Z. Lu, X. Jiang, and A. Kot, “Deep coupled ResNet for lowresolution face recognition,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 25, no. 4,
pp. 526–530, Apr. 2018.
[36] A. Odena, C. Olah, and J. Shlens, “Conditional image synthesis with
auxiliary classifier GANs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML),
2017, pp. 2642–2651.
[37] Y. Wang, L. Wang, H. Wang, and P. Li, “End-to-end image superresolution via deep and shallow convolutional networks,” 2016. [Online].
Available: arXiv:1607.07680.
[38] M. D. Zeiler and R. Fergus, “Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.. 2014, pp. 818–833.
[39] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), 2016, pp. 770–778.
[40] G. Huang, Z. Liu, L. Van Der Maaten, and K. Q. Weinberger, “Densely
connected convolutional networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2017, pp. 4700–4708.
[41] J. Shore and R. Johnson, “Axiomatic derivation of the principle of maximum entropy and the principle of minimum cross-entropy,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Theory, vol. IT-26, no. 1, pp. 26–37, Jan. 1980.
[42] S. Kullback and R. A. Leibler, “On information and sufficiency,” Ann.
Math. Stat., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 79–86, 1951.
[43] P. Chardy, M. Glemarec, and A. Laurec, “Application of inertia methods to benthic marine ecology: Practical implications of the basic
options,” Estuarine Coastal Marine Sci., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 179–205,
1976.
[44] O. Pele and M. Werman, “The quadratic-Chi histogram distance family,”
in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2010, pp. 749–762.
[45] K. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Z. Li, and Y. Qiao, “Joint face detection and alignment using multitask cascaded convolutional networks,” IEEE Signal
Process. Lett., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 1499–1503, Apr. 2016.
[46] S. Rudrani and S. Das, “Face recognition on low quality surveillance
images, by compensating degradation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Image Anal.
Recognit. (ICIAR), 2011, pp. 212–221.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on September 20,2026 at 08:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

234

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMETRICS, BEHAVIOR, AND IDENTITY SCIENCE, VOL. 2, NO. 3, JULY 2020

[47] Y. Wong, S. Chen, S. Mau, C. Sanderson, and B. C. Lovell, “Patch-based
probabilistic image quality assessment for face selection and improved
video-based face recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW) Biometrics, 2011, pp. 74–81.
[48] M. Grgic, K. Delac, and S. Grgic, “Scface–surveillance cameras face
database,” Multimedia Tools Appl., vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 863–879, 2011.
[49] A. Bhattacharjee and S. Das. (2019). ICFD: Indian Classroom Face
Dataset. [Online]. Available: https://sites.google.com/view/icfd
[50] P. Vageeswaran, K. Mitra, and R. Chellappa, “Blur and illumination
robust face recognition via set-theoretic characterization,” IEEE Trans.
Image Process., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 1362–1372, Apr. 2013.
[51] E. Tzeng, H. Hoffman, T. Darell, and K. Saenko, “Simultaneous deep
transfer across domains and tasks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis. (ICCV), 2015, pp. 4068–4076.
[52] C. Szegedy, S. Ioffe, V. Vanhoucke, and A. A. Alemi, “Inception-v4,
inception-ResNet and the impact of residual connections on learning,”
in Proc. 31st AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2017, pp. 4278–4284.
[53] Y. Wen, K. Zhang, Z. Li, and Y. Qiao, “A discriminative feature learning
approach for deep face recognition,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ECCV), 2016, pp. 499–515.
[54] L. V. D. Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,” J. Mach.
Learn. Res., vol. 9, pp. 2579–2605, Nov. 2008.
[55] G. B. Huang, M. Mattar, T. Berg, and E. Learned-Miller, “Labeled faces
in the wild: A database for studying face recognition in unconstrained
environments,” Dept. Comput. Sci., Univ. Massachusetts, Amherst, MA,
USA, Rep. 07-49, 2008.
[56] B. F. Klare et al., “Pushing the frontiers of unconstrained face detection and recognition: IARPA janus benchmark A,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2015, pp. 1931–1939.

Sukhendu Das (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.Tech. degree from the Department of Electrical
Engineering, IIT Kharagpur in 1985, the M.Tech.
degree in computer technology from IIT Delhi in
1987, and the Ph.D. degree from IIT Kharagpur
in 1993. He is currently employed as a Professor
with the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, IIT Madras, Chennai, India, where he
has been a faculty since 1989. He has worked
as a Visiting Scientist with the University of
Applied Sciences, Pforzheim, Germany, for postdoctoral research work, from December 2001 to May 2003, and a Visiting
Fellow/Scientist with the University of UWA, Perth, WA, Australia, from June
2006 to August 2006, and from July 2008 to September 2008. He has guided
seven (currently, guiding three) Ph.D. students, 30 (currently, guiding nine)
M.S., 42 M.Tech. (+ Dual) (currently, guiding ten), and nine B.Tech. students. He had completed several international and national sponsored projects
and consultancies, both as the Principle and Co-Investigators. He has published more than 150 technical papers in international and national journals
and conferences. His current areas of research interests are: visual perception,
computer vision: digital image processing and pattern recognition, computer
graphics, artificial neural networks, computational science and engineering,
soft computing, deep learning, and computational brain modeling. He has
received five best papers and a best design contest award. Significant and
Novel Technical Contributions are: MSGAN for Video Prediction; MST-CSS
Representation for CBVR Tasks; SUBBAND Face, Deep-DA or TransferCNN, Eigen-Domain Transformation and Eigen-Scale Space Representations
for Face-Based Biometry Applications; Creation of an Outdoor Surveillance
Face Database (Support from MCIT, GOI) for Biometry; and Manifold-Based
Alignment for Optimization Using Domain Adaptation, for Applications in
Face, Object and Video Categorization Tasks. He has the reviewed several
papers in international journals (IEEE, IET, Elsevier, and Springer) and the
chaired several sessions in conferences.

Avishek Bhattacharjee received the B.Tech. degree
in computer science and engineering from Netaji
Subhash Engineering College, Kolkata, India, in
2016. He has been an MS by Research Scholar
with the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras,
India, since 2016. His research interests include
computer vision, face recognition, deep learning,
neural networks, machine learning, and transfer
learning.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on September 20,2026 at 08:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

