Labeled Faces in the Wild: A Database for
Studying Face Recognition in Unconstrained
Environments
Gary B. Huang1 , Marwan Mattar1 , Tamara Berg2 , and Erik Learned-Miller1
1

University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA
{gbhuang, mmattar, elm}@cs.umass.edu
2
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY
tlberg@cs.sunysb.edu

Abstract. Most face databases have been created under controlled conditions to facilitate the study of specific parameters on the face recognition problem. These parameters include such variables as position, pose,
lighting, background, camera quality, and gender. While there are many
applications for face recognition technology in which one can control
the parameters of image acquisition, there are also many applications in
which the practitioner has little or no control over such parameters. This
database, Labeled Faces in the Wild, is provided as an aid in studying
the latter, unconstrained, recognition problem. The database contains
labeled face photographs spanning the range of conditions typically encountered in everyday life. The database exhibits “natural” variability
in factors such as pose, lighting, race, accessories, occlusions, and background. In addition to describing the details of the database, we provide
specific experimental paradigms for which the database is suitable. This
is done in an effort to make research performed with the database as
consistent and comparable as possible. We provide baseline results, including results of a state of the art face recognition system combined with
a face alignment system. To facilitate experimentation on the database,
we provide several parallel databases, including an aligned version.

1

Introduction

This paper describes a database of human face images designed as an aid in
studying the problem of unconstrained face recognition.1 The database can be
viewed and downloaded at http://vis-www.cs.umass.edu/lfw/.
1

We note that for more general classes of objects such as cars or dogs, the term
“recognition” often refers to the problem of recognizing a member of the larger
class, rather than a specific instance. When one “recognizes” a cat (in the context
of computer vision research), it is meant that one has identified a particular object
as a cat, rather than a particular cat. In the context of general objects, the term
identification is used to refer to recognizing a specific instance of a class (such as
Bob’s Toyota), as in [1],[2],[3]. However, in the literature on human faces, the term
recognition is typically used to refer to the identification of a particular individual,
not just a human being, and we adopt this latter terminology here.

2

Gary B. Huang, Marwan Mattar, Tamara Berg, Erik Learned-Miller

Face recognition is the problem of identifying a specific individual, rather
than merely detecting the presence of a human face, which is often called face
detection. The general term “face recognition” can refer to a number of different
problems including, but not limited to, the following.
Face Verification: Given a picture of a face, decide which person from among
a set of people the picture represents, if any.
Pair Matching: Given two pictures, each of which contains a face, decide
whether the two people pictured represent the same individual.
Our database, which we called Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW), can be
used to study these problems in unconstrained environments, as well as other
face processing tasks, such as face alignment and face segmentation.
The primary contribution of LFW is providing a large set of relatively unconstrained face images. By unconstrained, we mean faces that show a large range
of the variation seen in everyday life. This includes variation in pose, lighting,
expression, background, race, ethnicity, age, gender, clothing, hairstyles, camera
quality, color saturation, and other parameters. The reason we are interested
in natural variation is that for many tasks, face recognition must operate in
real-world situations where we have little to no control over the composition,
or the images are pre-existing. For example, there is a wealth of unconstrained
face images on the Internet, and developing recognition algorithms capable of
handling such data would be extremely beneficial for information retrieval and
data mining. Since LFW closely approximates the distribution of such images,
algorithms trained on LFW could be directly applied to web IR applications.
In contrast to LFW, existing face databases contain more limited and carefully
controlled variation, as we describe in Section 2.
Figure 1 shows images from LFW representative of the diversity in the
database. Tables 1 gives statistics of LFW such as number of images and people.
LFW is a valuable tool for studying face verification and pair matching in
unconstrained environments, as we discuss in Section 3. To facilitate fair comparison of algorithms, we give specific protocols for developing and assessing
algorithms using LFW (Section 4). By construction, algorithm performance on
LFW is generalizable to performance in an end-to-end recognition system, as we
describe in Section 5. We allow for easy experimentation with LFW by making
publicly available parallel versions of the database containing aligned images and
superpixel computation (Section 6.1). We give baseline results for LFW using
both standard and state of the art face recognition methods (Section 7).

2

Related Databases

There are a number of face databases available to researchers in face recognition.
These databases range in size, scope and purpose. The photographs in many of
these databases were acquired by small teams of researchers specifically for the
purpose of studying face recognition. Acquisition of a face database over a short
time and particular location has advantages for certain areas of research, giving
the experimenter direct control over the parameters of variability in the database.

Labeled Faces in the Wild

3

Fig. 1. Sample images from LFW (first row), FRGC (second row), and BioID (third
row), representative of variation within each database (best viewed in color)
Table 1. Face Database Statistics
(a) Comparison of LFW, FRGC, and
(b) Distribution of LFW
BioID
Database # of people Total images # of images # of people # of images
/person (% of people) (% of images)
LFW
5749
13233
FRGC
>466
>50000
1
4069 (70.8) 4096 (30.7)
BioID
23
1521
2-5
1369 (23.8) 3739 (28.3)
FERET
1199
14126
6-10
168 (2.92)
1251 (9.45)
11-20
86 (1.50)
1251 (9.45)
21-30
25 (0.43)
613 (4.63)
31-80
27 (0.47)
1170 (8.84)
> 81
5 (0.09)
1140 (8.61)
Total
5749
13233

On the other hand, in order to study more general, unconstrained face recognition problems, in which faces are drawn from a very broad distribution, one
should train and test face recognition algorithms on highly diverse sets of faces.
While it is possible to manipulate a large number of variables in the laboratory
in an attempt to make such a database, there are two drawbacks to this approach. The first is that it is extremely labor intensive. The second is that it is
difficult to gauge exactly which distributions of various parameters one should
use to make the most useful database. What percentage of subjects should wear
sunglasses, or have beards, or be smiling? How many backgrounds should contain
cars, boats, grass, deserts, or basketball courts?
One possible solution to this problem is simply to measure a “natural” distribution of faces. Of course, no single canonical distribution of faces can capture
a natural distribution that is valid across all possible application domains. Our
database uses a set of images that was originally gathered from news articles on
the web. This set clearly has its own biases. For example, there are not many

4

Gary B. Huang, Marwan Mattar, Tamara Berg, Erik Learned-Miller

images which occur under very poor lighting conditions. Also, because we use
the Viola-Jones detector as a filter for the database, there are a limited number
of side views of faces, and few views from above or below. However, the range
and diversity of pictures present is very large. We believe such a database will
be an important tool in studying unconstrained face recognition.
Existing face databases generally differ from LFW in one of two key aspects.
Labeled databases for recognition, such as the Face Recognition Grand Challenge [4], BioID [5], FERET [6], and CMU PIE [7], are typically taken under
very controlled conditions, with less people and diversity than LFW. For instance, images in LFW often contain complex phenomena such as headgear,
additional people and faces in the background, and self-occlusion. Moreover,
variations in parameters such as pose, lighting, and expression are carefully controlled in other databases, as compared with the uncontrolled variation in LFW
that approximates the conditions in every day life. On the other hand, databases
such as Caltech 10000 Web Faces [8] present highly diverse image sets similar
to LFW, but are designed for face detection and do not contain person labels,
making them unsuitable for recognition.
We now discuss the origin for LFW and comparisons with two of the more
similar existing face recognition databases.2
Faces in the Wild [10],[11]. In this work, it was shown that a large, partially
labeled database of face images could be built using imperfect data from the
web. The database was built by jointly analyzing pictures and their associated
captions to cluster images by identity. The resulting data set, which achieved a
labelling accuracy of 77% [11], was informally referred to as “Faces in the Wild”.
However, the database was not intended to act as training and test data for
new experiments, and contained a high percentage of label errors and duplicated
images. As a result, various researchers derived ad hoc subsets of the database
for new research projects [2],[12],[13],[14]. The need for a clean version of the
data set warranted doing the job thoroughly and publishing a new database.
The Face Recognition Grand Challenge Databases (FGRC) [4]. The
FGRC was designed to study the effect of new, richer data types on face recognition, and thus includes high resolution data, three-dimensional scans, and image
sequences. In contrast, LFW consists of faces extracted from previously existing
images and hence can be used to study recognition from images that were not
taken for the special purpose of face recognition by machine.
Another important difference between the data sets associated with the
FRGC and our data set is the general variety of images. For example, while there
are large numbers of images with uncontrolled lighting in the FRGC data sets,
these images contain a great deal less natural variation than the LFW images.
For example, the FRGC outdoor uncontrolled lighting images contain two images of each subject, one smiling and one with a neutral expression. The LFW
images, in contrast contain arbitrary expressions. Variation in clothing, pose,
background, and other variables is much greater in LFW than in the FRGC
2

See [9] for more detailed comparisons and a more complete list of existing face
databases.

Labeled Faces in the Wild

5

databases. As mentioned earlier, the difference is one of controlled variation
(FRGC) versus natural or random variation (LFW).
The BioID Face Database [5]. Similar to LFW, BioID strives to capture
realistic settings with variability in pose, lighting, and expression. Unlike LFW,
however, the distribution of images is more limited, focusing on a small number
of home and office environments. Images for a given individual are generally
different views of the same scene, whereas images in LFW for a given individual
tend to be from a variety of venues. In addition, LFW has much more variability
with respect to race, as the large majority of people in BioID are Caucasians.
Finally, BioID is targeted at the face detection problem, and no person labels are
given, so images would need to be manually labeled to be used for recognition.
While BioID is an interesting database of face images which may be useful
for a number of purposes such as face detection in indoor enviroments, LFW will
be useful for solving more general and difficult face recognition problems with
large populations in highly variable environments.
In summary, there are a great number of face databases available, and while
each has a role in the problems of face recognition or face detection, LFW fills
an important gap for the problem of unconstrained face recognition.

3

Intended Uses

As mentioned in the introduction, this database is aimed at studying face recognition in realistic, unconstrained environments. Specifically, we focus on the two
formulations of face verification and pair matching.
3.1

Face Verification

In the face verification paradigm (e.g. [15], [16]), there is a pre-specified gallery
consisting of face images of a set of people, where the identity of each face image
is known. The problem is to take a new query image, and decide which person
in the gallery the new image represents. For instance, the gallery may consist of
10 images each of 10 different people, and the task would be to decide which of
the 10 people a new input image represents.
Generally, face verification has been tested in situations where both the
gallery images and query images are taken under controlled environments. For
instance, even in Experiment 4 of the FRGC [4], which was designed to test the
case in which the query images are taken in a more uncontrolled environment,
the gallery images are still controlled.
This assumption is reasonable for certain tasks, such as recognition for security access, where gallery images can be taken ahead of time in a fixed environment, and query images can be taken in the same environment. On the other
hand, for a large range of tasks, this assumption does not hold. For instance,
as an information retrieval task, a user may wish to have photos automatically
tagged with the names of the people, using a gallery of previously manually
annotated photographs, which would not be taken in a controlled environment.

6

Gary B. Huang, Marwan Mattar, Tamara Berg, Erik Learned-Miller

For studying unconstrained face verification, LFW contains 158 people with
at least 10 images in the database, and in the next section we describe a specific
protocol for designing and testing verification using this subset of the database.
3.2

Pair Matching

An alternative formulation of face recognition is the pair matching paradigm:
given a pair of face images, decide whether the images are of the same person.
Within the pair matching paradigm, there are a number of subtly, but importantly different recognition problems. Some of these differences concern the specific organization of training and testing subsets of the database. A critical
aspect of our database is that for any given training-testing split, the
people in each subset are mutually exclusive. In other words, for any pair
of images in the training set, neither of the people pictured in those images is
in any of the test set pairs. Similarly, no test image appears in a corresponding
training set. We refer to this case, in which neither of the individuals pictured in
the test pair have been seen during training, as the unseen pair match problem.
At training time, it is essentially impossible to build a model for any person in
the test set, making this problem substantially different from the face verification
paradigm. In particular, for LFW, since the people in test images have never been
seen before, there is no opportunity to build models for such individuals, except
to do this at test time from a single image. Instead, this paradigm is meant to
focus on the generic problem of differentiating any two individuals that have
never been seen before. Thus, a different type of learning is suggested–learning
to discriminate among any pair of faces, rather than learning to find exemplars
of a gallery of people as in face verification. Recently, there have been several
important developments in this area of face recognition research [1],[14],[2].
A closely related problem to unseen pair matching is learning from one example [17], although there are subtle differences between the two.3
3.3

Pair Matching versus Face Verification

As mentioned earlier, we believe that unseen pair matching is one of the most
general and fundamental face recognition problems. At a basic level, human beings are capable of recognizing faces after only seeing one example image, and
thus are fundamentally different from algorithms that are only capable of performing matching against a fixed gallery of exemplars. Moreover, as we attempt
to scale recognition systems to be able to deal with orders of magnitude more
people, algorithms designed to learn general variability will be less computationally and resource intensive than methods that attempt to learn a specific model
for each person, and likely perform better as well.
From a practical standpoint, pair matching algorithms require less supervision, only requiring examples of matching and mismatching pairs, rather than
exemplars of each person to be identified. For instance, this would significantly
3

See [9], Section IIIA for more detail.

Labeled Faces in the Wild

7

simplify the previously mentioned image annotation problem. A pair matching
algorithm could be trained independently on separate existing data, then used to
label photographs in a collection with the names of the people pictured by clustering face images that were likely to be the same person. In comparison, a face
verification algorithm would require manually labeled examples and would only
be able to recognize from among the people appearing in the labeled examples.
For these reasons, we believe the unseen pair matching problem is an important area of face recognition and that having the LFW database as a benchmark
for developing and comparing algorithms will help push new developments in
this area. In addition to containing a larger variety of images matching reallife complexity than existing databases, LFW also contains a larger number of
people, an important aspect for pair matching, allowing algorithms to discriminate between general faces rather than a specific small number of faces within
a gallery.

4

Protocols

Proper use of training, validation, and testing sets is crucial for the accurate
comparison of face recognition algorithms. For instance, performance will be
improperly biased upward if the parameters of the algorithm are inadvertently
tuned to the test set. We provide clear guidelines for the use of this data to
minimize “fitting to the test data”. Also, the size and difficulty of the data set
may mitigate the degree to which unintended overfitting problems may occur.
For each recognition paradigm (verification and pair matching), we organize
our data into two “Views”, or groups of indices. View 1 is for algorithm development and general experimentation, prior to formal evaluation. This might also
be called a model selection or validation view. View 2, for performance reporting, should be used only for the final evaluation of a method. The goal of this
methodology is to use the final test sets as seldom as possible before reporting.
View 1: Model selection and algorithm development. The main purpose of this view of the data is so that researchers can freely experiment with
algorithms and parameter settings without worrying about overusing test data.
For example, if one is using support vector machines and trying to decide upon
which kernel to use, it would be appropriate to test various kernels on View 1 of
the database. Training and testing algorithms from this view may be repeated
as often as desired without significantly biasing final results.
View 2: Performance reporting. The second view of the data should be
used sparingly, and only for performance reporting. Ideally, it should only be
used once, as choosing the best performer from multiple algorithms, or multiple
parameter settings, will bias results toward artificially high accuracy. Once a
model or algorithm has been selected (using View 1 if desired), the performance
of that algorithm can be measured using View 2. For both recognition paradigms,
View 2 consists of 10 splits of training and test sets, and the experimenter should
report aggregate performance of a classifier on these 10 separate experiments.

8

Gary B. Huang, Marwan Mattar, Tamara Berg, Erik Learned-Miller

It is critical for performance reporting that the final parameters of the classifier under each experiment be set using either the data in View 1 or only the
training data for that experiment. An algorithm may not, during performance reporting, set its parameters to maximize the combined accuracy across
all 10 training sets. The training and testing sets overlap across experiments,
thus optimizing a classifier simultaneously using all training sets is essentially
fitting to the test data, since the training set for one experiment is the testing
data for another. In other words, each of the 10 experiments (both the training and testing phases) should be run completely independently of the others,
resulting in 10 separate classifiers (one for each test set).
While there are many methods for reporting the final performance of a classifier, including ROC curves and Precision-Recall curves, we ask that each experimenter, at a minimum, report the estimated mean accuracy and the
standard errorPof the mean for View 2 of the database. The estimated mean
10
accuracy is µ̂ = i=1 pi /10, where pi is the percentage of correct classifications
on subset i of View 2. It is important to note that accuracy should be computed
with parameters and thresholds chosen independently of the test data, ruling
out, for instance, simply choosing the point on a Precision-Recall√curve giving
the highest accuracy. The standard error of the
is SE = σ̂/ 10, where σ̂
qmean
P10
2
is the estimate of the standard deviation, σ̂ =
i=1 (pi − µ̂) /9.
The training sets in View 2 overlap, therefore the standard error may be
biased downward somewhat relative to what would be obtained with fully independent training sets and test sets. However, because the test sets of View
2 are independent, we believe this quantity will be valuable in assessing the
significance of the difference among algorithms.4
4.1

Face Verification

For face verification, View 1 of LFW consists of 892 images from 38 randomly
selected people from the 158 people with at least 10 images in the database.
These images, along with images of people with less than 10 images, may be
used in any manner for model selection or parameter estimation. View 2 consists
of 3432 images from the remaining 120 people. Each of the 10 runs consists of a
stratified split, such that for each person, ninety percent of that person’s images
appears as training and the other ten percent as testing.
In addition to reporting the estimated mean accuracy (the micro-average
of the individual results), experimenters should also report the macro-average,
P10 P120
which is the mean of the accuracies for each person µ̂macro = i=1 j=1 pij /1200,
where pij is the percentage of correct classifications for person j on run i, and
standard error (where σ̂ is the standard deviation of the pij ’s). This average
accounts for the differing number of test instances for each person.
4

We remind the reader that for two algorithms whose standard errors overlap, one
may conclude that they their difference is not statistically significant at the 0.05
level. However, one may not conclude, in general, that algorithms whose standard
errors do not overlap are statistically different at the 0.05 level.

Labeled Faces in the Wild

4.2

9

Pair Matching

For pair matching, View 1 of LFW consists of two subsets of the database, one for
training, containing 2200 pairs, and one for testing, containing 1000 pairs. The
people appearing in the training and testing sets are mutually exclusive. View
2 consists of 6000 pairs, divided into ten subsets, and performance is computed
using 10-fold cross validation using those subsets.
It should be noted that some images in View 1 may appear in View 2 as
well, as the two views were selected randomly and independently from the entire database. This multiple-view approach has been used, rather than a traditional training-validation-testing split of the database, in order to maximize the
amount of data available for training and testing. Ideally, one would have enough
images in a database so that training, validation, and testing sets could be nonoverlapping. However, in order to maximize the size of our training and testing
sets, we have allowed reuse of the data between View 1 of the database and View
2 of the database. The bias introduced into the results by this approach is very
small and outweighed by the benefit of the resulting larger training and test set
sizes.
Forming training pairs. Whenever one works with matched and mismatched data pairs, the issue of creating auxiliary training examples by using
the transitivity of equality arises. For example, in a training set, if one matched
pair consists of the 10th and 12th images of George W Bush, and another pair
consists of the 42nd and 50th images of George W Bush, then it might seem
reasonable to add other image pairs, such as (10, 42), (10, 50), (12, 42) and
(12, 50), to the training data using an automatic procedure. One could argue
that such pairs are implicitly present in the original training data, given that the
images have been labeled with the name George W Bush. Auxiliary examples
could be added to the mismatched pairs using a similar method.
Rather than disallowing such augmentation or penalizing researchers who do
not wish to add many thousands of extra pairs of images to their training sets,
we give two separate methods for using training data. These methods and details
on how the training sets can be generated can be found in Section IV of [9].

5

The Detection-Alignment-Recognition Pipeline

Many real world applications wish to automatically detect, align, and recognize
faces in a larger still image, or in a video of a larger scene. Thus, face recognition
is often naturally described as part of a Detection-Alignment-Recognition (DAR)
pipeline, as illustrated in Figure 2. To complete this pipeline, we need automatic
algorithms for each stage of the pipeline. In addition, each stage of the pipeline
must either accept images from, or prepare images for, the next stage of the
pipeline. To facilitate this process, we have purposefully designed our database
to represent the output of the detection process.
In particular, every face image in our database is the output of the ViolaJones face detection algorithm [18]. The motivation for this is as follows. If one

10

Gary B. Huang, Marwan Mattar, Tamara Berg, Erik Learned-Miller

Fig. 2. The Detection-Alignment-Recognition (DAR) pipeline. The images of the LFW
database represent the output of the Viola-Jones detector. By working with such a
database, the developer of alignment and recognition algorithms know that their methods will fit easily into the DAR pipeline.

can develop a face alignment algorithm (and subsequent recognition algorithm)
that works directly on LFW, then it is likely to also work well in an end-to-end
system that uses a face detector as a first step. This alleviates the need for each
researcher to worry about the process of detection, or about the possibility that
a manually aligned database does not adequately represent the true variability
seen in the world. In other words, it allows the experimenter to focus on the
problems of alignment and recognition rather detection.

6

Construction and Composition Details

The process of building the database can be broken into the following steps5 :
1. gathering raw images,
2. applying a face detector and manually eliminating false positives,
3. eliminating duplicate images,
4. hand labeling (naming) the detected people,
5. cropping and rescaling the detected faces, and
6. forming pairs of training and testing pairs for View 1 and View 2 of the
database.
As a starting point, we used the raw images from the Faces in the Wild
database [10]. The OpenCV6 trained version of the Viola-Jones face detector
[18] was run on each image. False positives, as well as duplicate images, which
we defined as images judged to have a common original source photograph, where
manually removed. The face region returned by the Viola-Jones detector generally contains only a subset of the whole head, so the region was automatically
expanded by 2.2 in each dimension to capture the entire head. This expanded
region was then cropped and rescaled to output a 250x250 JPEG 2.0 image.
6.1

Parallel Databases

To facilitate experimentation on LFW, we also present several parallel versions
of our database. We created an aligned version of the database, and for both the
original and the aligned versions, we computed superpixels for each image.
5
6

See [9] Section VI for specific details of each step.
http://opencvlibrary.sourceforge.net/

Labeled Faces in the Wild

11

Fig. 3. Examples of superpixels. The left column is the original image, the middle column is the Mori segmentation (N sp=100, N sp2=200, N ev=40), and the right column
is the Felzenszwalb-Huttenlocher segmentation (sigma=0.5, K=100, min=20).

Alignment. To create an aligned version of our database, we used an implementation of the congealing and funneling method of Huang et al. [12].7 We
took one image each of 800 people selected at random to learn a sequence of
distribution fields, which we then used to funnel every image in the database.
Superpixels. A superpixel representation of an image is a division of the
image into a number of small contiguous regions where the pixel values in each
region are homogeneous. It is thus a type of oversegmentation of an image.
Superpixels have recently started replacing pixels as the basic building block for
an image in several object recognition and segmentation models [19], [20], [21],
[22].8 This transition is partly due to the larger spatial support that superpixels
provide, allowing more global features to be computed than on pixels alone.
Superpixel representations have already been successfully applied to face segmentation [22] and we believe they can also be useful for detection and recognition. Therefore, we provide superpixel representations for all the images in the
database based on Mori’s online implementation [19].9 We also experimented
with the Felzenszwalb and Huttenlocher [24]10 algorithm but found that Mori’s
method, while more computationally expensive, did a much better job at preserving the face-background boundary, a crucial property for superpixel-based
segmentation. Figure 3 contains sample superpixel results of both methods on
four diverse images from the database.

7

Results

To establish baseline results as well as validate the difficulty of LFW, we used
the standard face recognition method of Eigenfaces [16].
7

http://vis-www.cs.umass.edu/code/congealingcomplex/
While the term superpixels has only recently been defined, the idea of using oversegmentations has existed in the vision community dating back to at least 1989 [23]
9
http://www.cs.sfu.ca/~mori/research/superpixels/
10
http://people.cs.uchicago.edu/~pff/segment/
8

12

Gary B. Huang, Marwan Mattar, Tamara Berg, Erik Learned-Miller
Table 2. Accuracy on View 2
(a) Verification
method

database

µ̂ ± SE
µ̂macro ± SE
Eigenfaces unaligned 0.1270 ± 0.0045
0.0702 ± 0.0055

(b) Pair Matching
method
database
µ̂ ± SE
Eigenfaces unaligned 0.6002 ± 0.0079
Nowak
unaligned 0.7245 ± 0.0040
Nowak
funneled 0.7333 ± 0.0060

Fig. 4. Precision-Recall curves for pair matching

Eigenfaces for verification. We divided View 1 into a training and test
set and ran Eigenfaces with different numbers of eigenvectors. Using enough
eigenvectors to capture 80% of the variance in the training set gave the optimal
performance on the test set. For each run of the 10 runs of View 2, we computed
eigenvectors from the training set, using enough to capture 80% of the variance,
and classified test instances using nearest-neighbor.
Eigenfaces for pair matching. We computed eigenvectors from the training set of View 1 and determined the threshold value for classifying pairs as
matched or mismatched that gave the best performance on the test set of View
1. For each run of View 2, the training set was used to compute the eigenvectors,
and pairs were classified using the threshold on Euclidian distance from View 1.
State of the art pair matching. To determine the current best performance on pair matching, we ran an implementation of the current state of the
art recognition system of Nowak and Jurie [14].11 The Nowak algorithm gives a
similarity score to each pair, and View 1 was used to determine the threshold
value for classifying pairs as matched or mismatched. For each of the 10 folds
of View 2 of the database, we trained on 9 of the sets and computed similarity
measures for the held out test set, and classified pairs using the threshold.
Alignment for pair matching. We also ran the Nowak algorithm on the
parallel aligned database of LFW, again using View 1 to pick the threshold that
optimized performance on the test set.
11

http://lear.inrialpes.fr/people/nowak/similarity/index.html

Labeled Faces in the Wild

13

The mean classification accuracy µ̂ and the standard error of the mean SE are
given in Table 2. In addition, the mean precision-recall curves for pair matching
are given in Figure 4. Each point on the curve represents the average over the
10 folds of (recall, precision) for a fixed threshold.
Chance performance is 0.008 on face verification and 0.5 on pair matching.
The low accuracy of Eigenfaces reflects the difficulty of the images in LFW and
of unconstrained face recognition in general. For verification, half of the 120
classes had 0 accuracy over all 10 runs. While the Nowak method significantly
outperforms Eigenfaces, it is still far below human-level performance and there
is a large amount of room for improvement.
Comparing the accuracy between the Nowak recognizer on the unaligned and
funneled images, the standard errors of the mean overlap. Therefore, the difference between the two is not statistically significant. Nonetheless, combining the
Nowak recognition system out of the box with the funneling alignment provides a
higher baseline to compare against. In addition, judging from the precision-recall
curves, the advantage of using the aligned images may be more pronounced for
a cost function emphasizing higher precision at the expense of a lower recall of
approximately 0.5. As a general comment, while simply running an algorithm on
the aligned database is likely to improve performance over the same algorithm on
the original database, modifying the algorithm to take advantage of the tighter
correspondence of faces in the aligned version can potentially do even better.

8

Conclusion

We have created a set of resources for researchers interested in unconstrained
face recognition. Specifically, we have
1. Introduced a new labeled database, Labeled Faces in the Wild, that contains
13,233 images of 5749 unique individuals with highly variable image conditions. The natural variability and difficulty of this database allows models
learned to be applied to new unseen images (taken from the web, for example). This database also fits neatly into the DAR pipeline.
2. Devised model selection and performance reporting splits for the verification
and pair matching problems. The splits and suggested evaluation metrics
were designed to facilitate fair comparisons of algorithms and avoid inadvertantly overfitting to the test data.
3. Provided baseline results using Eigenfaces, both as an example of how to set
algorithm parameters and to validate the difficulty of this database for both
recognition problems.
4. Provided results using the state of the art method [14] for pair matching.
5. Provided parallel versions of the database. The aligned version can be used
to improve the performance and run time (by reducing the search space) and
computed superpixels preserve the face-background boundary well and can
be reliably used for detection, recognition, and segmentation.
We believe this database and accompanying resources will provide another
stimulus to the vibrant research area of face recognition.

14

Gary B. Huang, Marwan Mattar, Tamara Berg, Erik Learned-Miller

References
1. Ferencz, A., Learned-Miller, E., Malik, J.: Building a classification cascade for
visual identification from one example. In: ICCV. (2005)
2. Jain, V., Ferencz, A., Learned-Miller, E.: Discriminative training of hyper-feature
models for object identification. In: BMVC. (2006)
3. Ferencz, A., Learned-Miller, E., Malik, J.: Learning hyper-features for visual identification. In: NIPS. Volume 18. (2005)
4. Phillips, P.J., Flynn, P.J., Scruggs, T., Bowyer, K., Chang, J., Hoffman, K., Marques, J., Min, J., Worek, W.: Overview of the Face Recognition Grand Challenge.
In: CVPR. (2005)
5. Jesorsky, O., Kirchberg, K., Frischolz, R.: Robust face detection using the Hausdorff distance. In Bigun, J., Smeraldi, F., eds.: Audio and Video Based Person
Authentication. Springer (2001) 90–95
6. National Institute of Standards and Technology: The Color FERET Database.
http://www.itl.nist.gov/iad/humanid/colorferet/home.html (2003)
7. Sim, T., Baker, S., Bsat, M.: The CMU pose, illumination, and expression database.
PAMI 25 (2003) 1615–1618
8. Angelova, A., Abu-Mostafa, Y., Perona, P.: Pruning training sets for learning of
object categories. In: CVPR. Volume 1. (2005) 495–501
9. Huang, G.B., Ramesh, M., Berg, T., Learned-Miller, E.: Labeled faces in the wild:
A database for studying face recognition in unconstrained environments. Technical
Report 07-49, University of Massachusetts, Amherst (2007)
10. Berg, T.L., Berg, A.C., Maire, M., White, R., Teh, Y.W., Learned-Miller, E.,
Forsyth, D.A.: Names and faces in the news. CVPR (2004)
11. Berg, T.L., Berg, A.C., Edwards, J., Forsyth, D.A.: Who’s in the picture. NIPS
(2004)
12. Huang, G.B., Jain, V., Learned-Miller, E.: Unsupervised joint alignment of complex
images. In: ICCV. (2007)
13. Ozkan, D., Duygulu, P.: A graph based approach for naming faces in news photos.
In: CVPR. (2006)
14. Nowak, E., Jurie, F.: Learning visual similarity measures for comparing never seen
objects. In: CVPR. (2007)
15. Phillips, P., Moon, H., Rizvi, S., Rauss, P.: The FERET evaluation methodology
for face-recognition algorithms. PAMI 22 (2000) 1090–1104
16. Turk, M., Pentland, P.: Face recognition using eigenfaces. CVPR (1991)
17. Beymer, D., Poggio, T.: Face recognition from one example view. Technical Report
AIM-1536, MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (1995)
18. Viola, P., Jones, M.: Robust real-time face detection. IJCV (2004)
19. Mori, G.: Guiding model search using segmentation. In: ICCV. (2005)
20. Hoiem, D., Efros, A., Hebert, M.: Recovering surface layout from an image. IJCV
75 (2007)
21. Ren, X., Malik, J.: Learning a classification model for segmentation. In: ICCV.
(2003)
22. Arora, H., Loeff, N., Forsyth, D., Ahuja, N.: Unsupervised segmentation of objects
using efficient learning. In: CVPR. (2007)
23. Beveridge, J.R., Griffith, J., Kohler, R., Hanson, A., Riseman, E.: Segmenting
images using localized histograms and region merging. IJCV 2 (1989)
24. Felzenszwalb, P., Huttenlocher, D.: Efficient graph-based image segmentation.
IJCV 59 (2004)

